1. CONTRACT ID CODE
PAGE OF PAGES
AMENDMENT OF SOLICITATION/MODIFICATION OF CONTRACT
2. AMENDMENT/MODIFICATION NO.
0001
1
3. EFFECTIVE DATE
07/08/2025
4. REQUISITION/PURCHASE REQ. NO.
138
5. PROJECT NO. (If applicable)
6. ISSUED BY
CODE
CAS
7. ADMINISTERED BY (If other than Item 6)
CODE
US Department of Labor
Customer Acquisition Services
200 Constitution Ave, NW S-4307
Washington DC 20210
8. NAME AND ADDRESS OF CONTRACTOR (No., street, county, State and ZIP Code)
CODE
(x)
9A. AMENDMENT OF SOLICITATION NO.
1605C5-25-R-00002
9B. DATED (SEE ITEM 11)
07/08/2025
10A. MODIFICATION OF CONTRACT/ORDER NO.
10B. DATED (SEE ITEM 13)
FACILITY CODE
11. THIS ITEM ONLY APPLIES TO AMENDMENTS OF SOLICITATIONS
☑The above numbered solicitation is amended as set forth in Item 14. The hour and date specified for receipt of Offers
☐ is extended. ☑ is not extended.
Offers must acknowledge receipt of this amendment prior to the hour and date specified in the solicitation or as amended, by one of the following methods: (a) By completing
Items 8 and 15, and returning
copies of the amendment; (b) By acknowledging receipt of this amendment on each copy of the offer submitted; or (c) By
separate letter or telegram which includes a reference to the solicitation and amendment numbers. FAILURE OF YOUR ACKNOWLEDGEMENT TO BE RECEIVED AT
THE PLACE DESIGNATED FOR THE RECEIPT OF OFFERS PRIOR TO THE HOUR AND DATE SPECIFIED MAY RESULT IN REJECTION OF YOUR OFFER If by
virtue of this amendment you desire to change an offer already submitted, such change may be made by telegram or letter, provided each telegram or letter makes
reference to the solicitation and this amendment, and is received prior to the opening hour and date specified.
12. ACCOUNTING AND APPROPRIATION DATA (If required)
CHECK ONE
E. IMPORTANT:
13. THIS ITEM ONLY APPLIES TO MODIFICATION OF CONTRACTS/ORDERS. IT MODIFIES THE CONTRACT/ORDER NO. AS DESCRIBED IN ITEM 14.
A. THIS CHANGE ORDER IS ISSUED PURSUANT TO: (Specify authority) THE CHANGES SET FORTH IN ITEM 14 ARE MADE IN THE CONTRACT
ORDER NO. IN ITEM 10A.
B. THE ABOVE NUMBERED CONTRACT/ORDER IS MODIFIED TO REFLECT THE ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES (such as changes in paying office,
appropriation date, etc.) SET FORTH IN ITEM 14, PURSUANT TO THE AUTHORITY OF FAR 43.103(b).
C. THIS SUPPLEMENTAL AGREEMENT IS ENTERED INTO PURSUANT TO AUTHORITY OF:
D. OTHER (Specify type of modification and authority)
Contractor
☐ is not.
☐ is required to sign this document and return
copies to the issuing office.
14. DESCRIPTION OF AMENDMENT/MODIFICATION (Organized by UCF section headings, including solicitation/contract subject matter where feasible.)
The purpose of this amendment is to revise Section C 1.7.7 - Place of Performance. See the
attached schedule for more information.
Period of Performance: 02/06/2026 to 02/05/2027
Except as provided herein, all terms and conditions of the document referenced in Item 9 A or 10A, as heretofore changed, remains unchanged and in full force and effect.
15A. NAME AND TITLE OF SIGNER (Type or print)
15B. CONTRACTOR/OFFEROR
16A. NAME AND TITLE OF CONTRACTING OFFICER (Type or print)
SHAYLA E. BATTLE
TEL: 202-693-7176
EMAIL: battle.shayla.e@dol.gov.
15C. DATE SIGNED
16B. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
16C. DATE SIGNED
(Signature of person authorized to sign)
NSN 7540-01-152-8070
Previous edition unusable
(Signature of Contracting Officer)
STANDARD FORM 30 (REV. 10-83)
Prescribed by GSA
FAR (48 CFR) 53.243
1605C5-25-R-00002 0001
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
SECTION B - SF 1449 CONTINUATION PAGE
B.1
CONTRACT TYPE & COST/PRICE SCHEDULE
The Government anticipates an award of one contract which has both firm-fixed-price and/or
labor-hour line items. See Attachment 3 - Pricing Sheet CES and Technical Exhibit 3 below for
the detailed cost/price information.
B.2
DISCOUNTS
Offerors shall factor in all costs and any applicable discounts of performing the requirements
under this solicitation.
END OF SECTION B
5
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
SECTION C – PERFORMANCE WORK STATEMENT
PART 1 - GENERAL INFORMATION
1.1 Mission
To secure and maintain survey participation and the collection of confidential employment, hour,
and wage data used for the development of principal federal economic indicators that measure
the health of the U.S. economy.
1.2 Description of Services/Introduction
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) collects data each month on employment, hours, and
earnings from a sample of nonfarm establishments through the Current Employment Statistics
(CES) program. The CES survey includes about 122,000 businesses and government agencies,
which cover approximately 666,000 individual worksites drawn from a sampling frame of
Unemployment Insurance (UI) tax accounts covering roughly 11 million establishments. The
active CES sample includes approximately one-third of all nonfarm payroll employees in the 50
states and the District of Columbia. From these data, a large number of employment, hours, and
earnings series in considerable industry and geographic detail are prepared and published each
month.
The CES survey collects the following data elements from business establishments:
•
All Employees (AE)
•
Women Employees (WE)
Production and Nonsupervisory Employees (PE)
•
AE Payroll
•
AE Hours
•
AE Commissions (paid at least once per month)
AE Overtime Hours (manufacturing only)
•
PE Payroll
•
PE Hours
•
PE Commissions (paid at least once per month)
PE Overtime Hours (manufacturing only)
For more information on the data collected by CES, please see Technical Exhibit 5 - CES Forms
and Data Elements.
The primary statistics derived from the CES survey are monthly estimates of employment, hours,
and earnings for the nation, states, and major metropolitan areas. Preliminary national estimates
for a given reference month are typically released on the third Friday after the conclusion of the
reference period in conjunction with data derived from a separate survey of households, the
Current Population Survey (CPS). The reference period for the CES survey is the pay period
which includes the 12th of the month. For more information on the CES production schedule,
please see Technical Exhibit 6 - CES Schedule.
6
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
For more information on CES, please visit https://www.bls.gov/ces/.
The contractor shall provide all personnel and supervision to provide non-personal services
necessary to perform BLS CES Data Collection activities as defined in this Performance Work
Statement, except as Specified in Part 3 as government-furnished property and services. The
contractor shall perform to the standards in this contract action.
1.3 Background
BLS is pursuing a contract to outsource data collection activities to a contractor. Specifically,
BLS is seeking for a contractor to perform Current Employment Statistics (CES) Data Collection
Center (DCC) operations.
Each month, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) collects data on employment, payroll, and paid
hours from a sample of establishments.
CES has a comprehensive program of new sample unit enrollment in four CES Data Collection
Centers. Nearly all initial CES enrollment occurs in the DCCs via Computer Assisted Telephone
Interviewing (CATI). After successful enrollment the DCCs will collect data via CATI before
transferring to a hybrid collection mode called Flex reporting. Flex reporting is a dynamic
collection method where CES attempts to collect microdata via the BLS web collection tool
based on a respondent's previous reporting behavior. With Flex reporting, the DCCs still
perform initial enrollment for each case via telephone and collect the data for three months prior
to the case being eligible for Flex. Once a case is converted to Flex, the respondent will receive
email prompts during the beginning of the collection cycle. If the respondent does not report
online by their typical reporting timeframe, the DCC will contact the respondent to collect the
data via CATI. Flex designated cases are DCC-owned and credited to the DCCs, whether the
data was collected via CATI or the web collection tool. Approximately 25 percent of all ongoing
CES monthly collection occurs in the DCCS, where 56 percent of those cases are collected via
Flex web collection. The DCCs are responsible for resolving all Flex cases that fail edit and
screening checks. In addition, the DCCs conduct an ongoing program of refusal conversion.
CES respondents who are not Flex but also report via the web collection tool are called Web
respondents. These firms are enrolled by the DCCs but are transferred to Web at the respondent's
request. Web respondents are also prompted monthly via email but are not contacted by the DCC
for monthly nonresponse. Data collected through this method are subject to a series of edit and
screening checks and the Help Desk is required to resolve any failures prior to being transmitted
to CES. About 10 percent of CES data are collected by Web.
The BLS Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) Center enrolls and collects data from large firms,
typically those with fifty or more worksites. Firms that report to the EDI Center provide an
electronic file to CES each month in a prescribed file format. This file includes data for all of the
firm's worksites. The file is received, processed, and edited by the EDI Center. About 56 percent
of CES data are collected by EDI.
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The CES DCCS collect less than one percent of CES data by fax.
For the establishments that do not use the above methods, data are collected using other web
collection tools, email, or other special arrangements. Approximately eight percent of CES data
are collected in these manners.
CES engages in continuous process improvement activities to improve quality and efficiency and
often implements changes that may affect how data are collected or processed. For more
information on the evolution of CES data collection, please visit:
https://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2016/article/one-hundred-years-of-current-employment-statistics-
data-collection.htm
a) CES Survey Units
The CES survey consists of certainty selected and probability selected units. All government
units, units with large levels of employment, and units processed by the EDI Center are certainty
selections and remain in the CES survey indefinitely. All remaining units are selected by
probability and remain in the CES survey for at least two years, but typically no more than four
consecutive years. All new probability selections and some certainty selections are enrolled by
the DCCs.
For more information on the CES sample, please visit:
https://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/cestn.htm
1.4 Objectives
The contractor shall provide non-personal services for the CES program with survey data
collection services at the government Data Collection Centers in Atlanta, GA; Dallas, TX;
Kansas City, MO; and Fort Walton Beach, FL. Limited telework flexibility will be provided.
Further, the contractor shall provide Help Desk services in Suitland, MD. The contractor shall
engage in their best effort to provide quality control (QC), training, and project management to
support contractor operations at the Data Collection Centers and Help Desk and fulfill the DCC's
mission.
The government retains responsibility for CES survey methodology, procedures, and tools
including:
•
Sampling methodology and selection.
•
Assignment of cases for enrollment and collection to Data Collection Centers.
•
Data collection instruments, including all hardware, software, and dashboards.
•
Policies and procedures for enrollment, collection, and refusal conversion.
8
1.5 Scope
BLS-created training materials.
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The contractor shall provide data collection services for the CES surveys in Federal government
DCCs, with limited telework flexibility. The contractor shall engage in best efforts to perform
activities which include but are not limited to the following:
a) Perform address refinement activities on sample units, known as cases, provided by the
government to verify and update unit registry information, confirm the business is still
operational, and identify a point of contact (POC) to receive enrollment packages
prepared by the contractor. This activity ensures that the government has the most current
sample unit contact information to successfully enroll participants into the survey.
b) Secure sample unit respondent participation in the survey, known as enrolling cases, to
ensure consistent participation that is representative of the sample frame across all
government-provided sample panels.
c) Contact refusal cases to attempt to convert them into respondents and increase respondent
participation in the survey.
d) Contact enrolled respondents who report data via BLS's proprietary Computer Assisted
Telephone Interview (CATI) system on a monthly basis to collect current month data and
missing data from previous months, reviewing and addressing edit and screening errors
flagged by the CATI system during the call with respondents.
e) Schedule dates and times with the respondent to collect data for the following month to
increase the likelihood of successful collection.
f) Attempt to transition respondents with established survey participation to the government
data collection website to streamline data collection and provide contractor staff with
additional time to work on address refinement and enrollment.
g) Contact web respondents who did not submit data after receiving government-issued
reminder emails to improve data collection rates.
h) Attempt to minimize collection by fax, email, and other means to reduce the risk of
breaches and errors from manual data entry.
i) Contact respondents whose reported microdata failed edit and screening tests to obtain
and enter corrected data or enter explanatory comment codes into the CATI system to
either confirm the accuracy of or correct the data so they can be included in estimation.
j) Operate a Help Desk to support web respondents, manually enter data received from the
government, and resolve data quality issues to ensure the accuracy of the data so they can
be included in estimation.
9
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
k) Assist the government in troubleshooting and resolving systems problems and formulate
recommendations on complex technical problems, as well as provide recommendations
on software and hardware changes when needed to support the continual improvement of
government operations.
1) Resolve issues related to information technology issues expeditiously to maintain high
levels of productivity.
The contractor shall provide quality control, training, and project management oversight to
support contractor activities and ensure that acceptable quality levels are consistently met or
exceeded.
1.6 Period of Performance
The period of performance shall be for one (1) Base Period of 12 months and four (4) 12-month
option periods:
Base Period:
Option Period 1:
02/06/2026
02/06/2027
-
02/05/2027
02/05/2028
02/06/2028 - 02/05/2029
Option Period 2:
Option Period 3:
02/06/2029 - 02/05/2030
Option Period 4:
02/06/2030 - 02/05/2031
The government reserves the right to extend the term of this contract action at the prices set forth
in Section B in accordance with the terms and conditions contained in clause 52.217-9 entitled,
"Option to Extend the Term of the Contract".
1.7 General Information
1.7.1 Quality Control
The contractor shall develop and maintain an effective quality control program to ensure services
are performed in accordance with this PWS. The contractor shall develop and implement
procedures to identify, prevent, and ensure non-recurrence of defective services. The contractor's
quality control program is the means by which they assure themselves that their work complies
with the requirement of the contract. At a minimum, the contractor shall develop quality control
procedures that address the areas identified in the Performance Requirements Summary Matrix.
After acceptance of the quality control plan, the contractor shall receive the Contracting Officer's
(CO) acceptance in writing of any proposed change to their Quality Control Plan.
1.7.2 Quality Assurance
The government shall evaluate the contractor's performance under this contract action in
accordance with the Quality Assurance Surveillance Plan. This plan is primarily focused on what
the government must do to ensure that the contractor has performed in accordance with the
performance standards. It defines how the performance standards will be applied, the frequency
of surveillance, and the minimum acceptable defect rate(s). The government will establish a
Quality Assurance Surveillance Plan for each task contained in this PWS.
10
1.7.3 Government Remedies
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The Contracting Officer shall follow FAR 52.212-4, “Contract Terms and Conditions-
Commercial Items" or 52.246-4, “Inspection of Services-Fixed Price" for contractor's failure to
perform satisfactory services or failure to correct non-conforming services.
1.7.4 Recognized Holidays
The contractor is not authorized to perform work on recognized holidays without the prior
approval of the Contracting Officer. Approved work performed on holidays or non-workdays
shall be billable at regular rates.
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King, Jr.
Inauguration Day (Washington, DC area only)
Washington's Birthday
Memorial Day
Juneteenth
Independence Day
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
1.7.5 Unscheduled Dismissals
Certain events, such as Executive Orders, inclement weather, or emergencies may result in the
closure of a government facility. Contractor employees may be required to work on federal
holidays as determined by the terms and conditions of their contract or task order.
• Contractor employees are required to work on dates considered holidays by Executive Orders,
during inclement weather or emergencies, unless the contract terms and conditions authorize a
paid holiday.
• If the government facility in which a contractor employee is scheduled to work is closed due to
the holiday declared by Executive Order, inclement weather, or emergencies, and the employee
is not required to report to work, payment will not be made for those hours if the subject
contractor or task order is a Time and Materials type contract, e.g., a Labor Hour contract.
Similarly, if the contract is of a Fixed Price nature, no deductions shall be made from the
contract price for the holiday, inclement weather, or emergencies.
.
• The contractor employee shall abide by their employer's stated policy on how to handle the
closure of a contractor work site. For example, a contractor employee may be performing
administrative functions or other non-critical duties in government-owned or controlled space
under a task order issued under a Multiple Award Schedule contract. If an Executive Order
creates a government holiday that closes the contractor employee's duty station, the Government
will not pay the contractor for that day, if the contract was awarded on a time or materials basis.
(Whether the contractor employee is compensated by the employing contractor is a different
matter).
11
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
• In the alternative, if a contractor was performing guard services in a federal building and a
holiday, inclement weather, or emergency was declared, work performance would still be
necessary. It is expected that the contract or task order would specifically address building
protection in the case of these events.
•
With respect to telecommuting, pursuant to FAR § 7.108, which implemented section 1428 of
Public Law 108-136, an agency shall generally not discourage a contractor from allowing its
employees to telecommute in the performance of government contracts. If telecommuting is not
a viable option for performance under a contract or task order, the contracting officer shall make
a pre-award determination stating that the requirements of the agency, including security
requirements, cannot be met.
1.7.6 Hours of Operation
Please refer to the Place of Performance section below for the hours of operation. Hours of
operation are subject to change by the government.
1.7.7 Place of Performance
a) Data Collection Centers
The DCCs are located in Federal government facilities in Atlanta, GA, and Dallas, TX, and in
government leased space in Kansas City, MO, and Fort Walton Beach, FL. Limited telework
flexibility is available under conditions listed in section 1.7.8. All four DCCs are responsible for
cases nationwide; assignments are not made on a regional basis. All employees must live within
commuting distance of the DCC they report to.
DCC
Address
Hours of Operation*
Workstations
61 Forsyth St, S.W.
Atlanta
Atlanta, GA 30303
6 am - 7 pm (Eastern)
525 Griffin St
Suite 221
50
72
50
Dallas
Dallas, TX 75202
6 am - 7 pm (Central)
2300 Main St
Room 11048
Kansas City
Kansas City, MO 64108
73 Eglin Pkwy, Ste 303
6 am - 7 pm (Central)
110
Fort Walton
Beach
Fort Walton Beach, FL
32548
6:30 am 5:30 pm
(Central)
115
*Hours of operation are subject to change.
The total number of workstations listed in the chart above includes cubicles and private offices
available to contract staff at each DCC and represents the maximum number of staff that can
work at each site. Interviewer workstations are cubicles and supervisory workstations are
typically private offices, dependent on availability. Interviewers are not allowed to use private
offices. If additional funding and equipment become available, the maximum number of staff
may be increased at the government's discretion.
12
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The government reserves the right to open new DCC locations and/or close existing DCC
locations. In the event that DCCs are added or removed, workload will be redistributed across
the DCCs according to workstation and staffing availability.
b) CES Help Desk
The Help Desk is based in the BLS National Office in Suitland, MD. The Help Desk is primarily
responsible for supporting web respondents. The Help Desk also manually enters data received at
the National Office and resolves data quality issues.
Help Desk
Address
Hours of
Operation
Workstations*
Bureau of Labor Statistics
4600 Silver Hill Rd
7:30 am - 8 pm
105
Suitland, MD
Hillcrest Heights, MD 20746 (Eastern)
*The total number of CES Help Desk staff is 5, but this number may increase as determined by
the government. The BLS headquarters is not expected to have physical space to house the CES
Help Desk in the Suitland Federal Center. Help Desk interviewers will be granted 100%
telework flexibility; however, they must still reside within commuting distance of the BLS
headquarters. If physical space is secured for the CES Help Desk, Help Desk interviewers will be
subject to the same telework flexibilities afforded to interviewers in the DCCs.
1.7.8 Telework
Telework flexibility is provided to the contractor. Only contractor staff with satisfactory
performance shall be deemed eligible to telework. Contractor staff eligible to telework must
conform to the requirements set forth in this PWS.
The contractor shall submit a Telework Plan for BLS approval that identifies metrics for how the
contractor will deem interviewers as eligible to telework and determine which staff should be on
site within a given day. The Telework Plan shall ensure that on-site staff be representative of the
contractor's staff and at a minimum include recent hires, trainers, low performers in need of
support, high performers to provide mentoring and training, and enough supervisors on site to
monitor interviewers working in federal facilities. Individual contractor staff who lack an
adequate work environment (e.g., no suitable off-site workspace, or personal residence having
inadequate Internet connection) shall be permitted to work on-site. Contractor staff who are
determined to be eligible for telework but have a preference to work on-site shall be permitted to
work on-site. The PM and contract management team must rely on productivity data to
demonstrate that contractor staff in a telework status are as productive as when they are working
on-site in federal facilities. Telework in any location other than contractor staff's residence must
be approved by the DCC Manager.
Contractor staff deemed eligible to telework under a Telework Plan approved by the government
must complete the DOL Telework training requirements prior to being permitted to work
remotely. Telework-eligible contractor staff must be within commuting distance of their physical
13


1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
work locations and must be available to be recalled into the office by the contractor with one
business day's notice. Contractor staff on a telework status who experience hardware or technical
issues that cannot be addressed remotely shall report to the federal facility to have equipment
repaired no later than the next business day when they are scheduled to work following the
determination that technical issues must be resolved on-site. The contractor shall not be
compensated for commute times for teleworking staff bringing their government-furnished
equipment for troubleshooting or repairs.
The government may, at its discretion, limit the number of contractor staff permitted in the office
at a given time, in which case the Telework Plan should be used to determine which contractor
staff will be in a telework status. The government reserves the right to review the Telework Plan
at its discretion and request changes. The government also reserves the right to rescind the
Telework Plan and recall contractor staff into the office with five business days' notice.
The government may, at its discretion, require that all contracting staff telework on specified
dates to ensure preparedness for continuity of operations.
All teleworking sites must be documented and approved by the Contracting Officer's
Representative (COR) prior to use. All telework sites must meet the security requirements
described in the BLS Confidentiality and Security Requirements.
1.7.9 Type of Contract
The government anticipates the award of a hybrid firm-fixed-price and labor hours contract.
Project management, supervision, and training are expected to be covered under a firm-fixed-
price component. All other labor categories are expected to be covered under a labor hours line
item.
1.7.10 Security Requirements
a. Confidentiality and Security
The contractor shall comply with the attached the BLS Confidentiality and Security
Requirements. Contractor personnel with access to BLS sensitive information must become
agents of the BLS by signing a BLS Agent Agreement and completing BLS confidentiality
training. The BLS Confidentiality and Security Requirements, which include the Confidentiality
Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act and the BLS Agent Agreement, can be
found in Attachments A.1 and A.2, respectively.
b. Physical Security
The contractor shall be responsible for safeguarding all government property provided for
contractor use. At the close of each work period, government facilities, equipment, and materials
shall be physically secured.
c. Key Control
14
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The contractor shall establish and implement methods of making sure all keys/key cards issued
to the contractor by the government are not lost or misplaced and are not used by unauthorized
persons. NOTE: All references to keys include key cards. No keys issued to the contractor by
the government shall be duplicated. The contractor shall develop procedures covering key
control that shall be included in the Quality Control Plan. Such procedures shall include turn-in
of any issued keys by personnel who no longer require access to locked areas. The contractor
shall immediately report any occurrences of lost or duplicate keys/key cards to the Contracting
Officer.
d. Lost Keys
In the event keys, other than master keys, are lost or duplicated, the contractor shall, upon
direction of the Contracting Officer, re-key or replace the affected lock or locks; however, the
government, at its option, may replace the affected lock or locks or perform re-keying. When the
government, the total cost of re-keying or the replacement of the lock, performs the replacement
of locks or rekeying or locks shall be deducted from the monthly payment due the contractor. In
the event a master key is lost or duplicated, the government and the total shall replace all locks
and keys for that system cost deducted from the monthly payment due the contractor.
f. Key Use
The contractor shall prohibit the use of government issued keys/key cards by any persons other
than the contractor's employees. The contractor shall prohibit the opening of locked areas by
contractor employees to permit entrance of persons other than contractor employees engaged in
the performance of assigned work in those areas, or personnel authorized entrance by the
Contracting Officer.
g. Lock Combinations.
The contractor shall establish and implement methods of ensuring that not all lock combinations
are revealed to unauthorized persons. The contractor shall ensure that lock combinations are
changed when personnel having access to the combinations no longer have a need to know such
combinations. These procedures shall be included in the contractor's Quality Control Plan.
h. Conservation of Utilities
The contractor shall instruct employees in utilities conservation practices. The contractor shall be
responsible for operating under conditions that preclude the waste of utilities, which include
turning off the water faucets or valves after using the required amount to accomplish cleaning
vehicles and equipment.
1.7.11 Data Rights
The government has unlimited rights to all documents and materials produced under this
contract. All documents and materials, to include the source codes of any software, produced
under this contract shall be government owned and are the property of the government with all
rights and privileges of ownership/copyright belonging exclusively to the government. All
15
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
materials supplied to the government will be the sole property of the government and may not be
used for any other purpose. This right does not abrogate any other government rights.
1.7.12 Special Qualifications
Not applicable.
1.7.13 Post Award Conference/Periodic Progress Meetings
The contractor agrees to attend any post award conference convened by the contracting activity
or contract administration office in accordance with Federal Acquisition Regulation Subpart
42.5. The CO, COR, and other government personnel, as appropriate, may meet periodically
with the contractor to review the contractor's performance. At these meetings, the CO will
apprise the contractor of how the government views the contractor's performance and the
contractor will apprise the government of problems, if any, being experienced. Appropriate
action shall be taken to resolve outstanding issues. These meetings shall be at no additional cost
to the government.
1.7.14 Contracting Officer's Representative
A COR will be delegated separately.
1.7.15 Key Personnel
The contractor shall identify the key personnel that will be responsible for managing the
contract. The Project Manager is considered key personnel for the contract. See 5.7.1 for PM
requirements. The PM shall be the single point of contact for the management of this contract.
The PM is responsible to the COR and the CO for compliance with all the requirements of this
contract. This is expected to be a full-time position.
The PM shall supervise and maintain a comprehensive management organization over staff
working on this contract. A staff management plan delineating the lines of authority shall be
maintained and provided to the COR on a quarterly basis. The PM must meet with the COR and
other program officials no less than once per month to discuss issues related to the administration
of the contract and actual performance on respective tasks. The contractor shall be available to
attend in-person at the BLS National Office in Suitland, MD, for these meetings at least once
quarterly; other meetings can be held by conference call or other virtual method. The contractor
shall not remove or divert key personnel unless written notice is provided at least 30 business
days prior to the removal. Furthermore, a replacement for the key personnel must be approved by
the CO at least 10 business days prior to the removal to ensure business continuity and transfer
of institutional knowledge.
In the event that any of the key personnel named in the contractor's proposal, as accepted by the
government, are unable to perform because of death, illness, resignation from the contractor's
employ, or other reasons, the contractor shall submit a written notice immediately to the CO. A
detailed explanation of the circumstances necessitating the proposed substitutions, complete
resumes for the proposed substitutes, and any other information that the CO deems pertinent to
approve the substitution shall be submitted to the CO as soon as possible, but no later than 30
16
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
days after this initial written notification. No substitution is to be made without prior written
approval by the CO. The Project Manager is designated as Key Personnel.
1.7.16 Identification of Contractor Employees
All contract personnel attending meetings, answering government telephones, and working in
other situations where their contractor status is not obvious to third parties are required to
identify themselves as such to avoid creating an impression in the minds of members of the
public that they are government officials. They must also ensure that all documents or reports
produced by contractors are suitably marked as contractor products or that contractor
participation is appropriately disclosed. Contractor personnel will be required to obtain Personal
Identity Verification (PIV) cards from a Government Services Administration credentialing
center to access government facilities and networks.
1.7.17 Contractor Personnel Conduct
Contractor personnel's conduct shall not reflect discredit upon the government. The contractor
shall ensure that personnel present a professional appearance. The contractor's employees shall
observe and comply with all local policies and procedures posted at each site concerning fire,
safety, environmental protection, sanitation, security, and possession of firearms or other lethal
or illegal weapons or substances. The contractor is responsible for ensuring that any contractor
employees providing services under this contract conduct themselves and perform services in a
professional, safe, and responsible manner. The contractor shall ensure no contractor employees
conduct political-related activities or events in any government or government-leased facilities.
The contractor shall abide by all applicable regulations, publications, manuals, and local policies
and procedures. The contractor shall adhere to and use the versions/revisions in effect. The
contractor shall comply with the policies and procedures set forth in all such documents.
1.7.18 Organizational Conflict of Interest
Contractor and subcontractor personnel performing work under this contract action may receive,
have access to or participate in the development of proprietary or source selection information
(e.g., cost or pricing information, budget information or analyses, specifications or work
statements, etc.) or perform evaluation services which may create a current or subsequent
Organizational Conflict of Interests (OCI), as defined in FAR Subpart 9.5. The contractor shall
notify the Contracting Officer immediately whenever it becomes aware that such access or
participation may result in any actual or potential OCI and shall promptly submit a plan to the
Contracting Officer to avoid or mitigate any such OCI. The contractor's mitigation plan will be
determined to be acceptable solely at the discretion of the Contracting Officer and in the event
the Contracting Officer unilaterally determines that any such OCI cannot be satisfactorily
avoided or mitigated, the Contracting Officer may affect other remedies as he or she deems
necessary, including prohibiting the contractor from participation in subsequent contracted
requirements which may be affected by the OCI.
17
17
1.7.19 Phase In/Phase Out Period
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
To minimize any decreases in productivity and to prevent possible negative impacts on
additional services, the contractor shall have personnel on board during the forty-five (45) day
phase in/phase out periods. During the phase in period, the contractor shall become familiar with
performance requirements in order to commence full performance of services on the contract
action start date.
18
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
PART 2 - DEFINITION & ACRONYMS
Contracting Officer's Representative. A representative from the requiring activity assigned by
the Contracting Officer to perform surveillance and to act as liaison to the contractor
Defective Service. A service output that does not meet the standard of performance associated
with it in the Performance Work Statement.
Quality Assurance. Those actions taken by the government to assure services meet the
requirements of the Performance Work Statement.
Quality Assurance Surveillance Plan. An organized written document specifying the surveillance
methodology to be used for surveillance of contractor performance.
Quality Control. Those actions taken by a contractor to control the performance of services so
that they meet the requirements of the PWS.
Best Effort: That effort expended by the contractor to perform within the awarded ceiling price
all work specified in this acquisition and all other obligations under this acquisition. This effort
includes providing required qualified personnel, properly supervised, and following industry
accepted methodologies and other practices. The effort is further characterized by operating at all
times with the government's best interest in mind, using efficient and effective methods, and
demonstrating sound cost control. The effort must be identical to the effort that would be
expended if this were a firm-fixed price acquisition and the contractor's profits were dependent
upon reducing costs while meeting the government's requirements in terms and quality and
schedule. Failure to provide this required effort may result in the withholding of payment for
hours expended that do not qualify as best effort or a reduction in the rate per hour to reflect
decreased value of services received.
19
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
PART 3 - GOVERNMENT-FURNISHED PROPERTY, EQUIPMENT, AND SERVICES
3.1
General
The government will provide office space for the Data Collection Centers that includes office
furniture (desks, chairs, and office storage), information technology (computers, printers,
monitors, keyboards, and internet connections), normal office supplies (pens, paper, staplers,
etc.), electronic fax services, internet, and telephone access. The government will provide
headsets for teleworking.
3.2
Equipment
The government will not provide private desktop printers for the offices. The government will
not provide additional equipment for home offices such as standing desks, additional keyboards,
or monitors. The contractor shall be responsible for providing any equipment deemed necessary
for reasonable accommodations approved for contractor staff.
The government will not provide office space for a project management office. The government
will provide a laptop computer to the PM.
The government will retain title to all government-furnished property. All materials developed
by the contractor under this contract shall become the property of the U.S. Department of Labor.
The government-furnished property and the materials developed by the contractor under this
contract shall only be used for the performance of this contract.
The government will maintain all facilities and equipment that shall be provided for use by the
contractor. Additionally, the contractor shall ensure that its personnel do not misuse any
government-furnished property.
The government will provide CATI and Help Desk processing software.
If due to the default, negligence (whether of action or omission), or dishonesty of the contractor
or its employees, or any combination of the prior activities, any government-owned or controlled
property is lost or damaged as a result of the contractor's performance of this contract, the
contractor shall be responsible to the government for such loss or damage.
Any separating contractor staff shall return all equipment upon their last day including laptops,
wired and wireless headsets and docking stations, and power cords for the laptops. After five
workdays, if the equipment is not returned, the contractor shall replace it or pay for the
replacement cost. The government at its option, may, in lieu of payment, require the contractor to
replace, at its own expense, all property lost or damaged. The contractor shall not provide
computer hardware or software without approval from the government. The contractor shall
provide a plan on how to reimburse the government for equipment lost or damaged by contractor
staff.
20
20
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
3.3 Services
3.3.1 Utilities
The government will ensure all utilities in the facility will be available for the contractor's use in
performance of tasks outlined in this PWS.
3.4
Facilities
The government will furnish all necessary workspace required for contractors working onsite to
support the effort(s) outlined in this PWS, to include desk space, telephones, computers and
other items necessary to maintain an office environment.
21
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
PART 4 CONTRACTOR FURNISHED ITEMS AND SERVICES
4.1 General
Except for those items specifically stated to be government-furnished in Part 3, the contractor
shall furnish all other items required to perform the services in this PWS.
4.2 Clearance
The contractor's employees, performing work in support of this contract action shall have
undergone the DOL Department of Personnel Suitability and Security clearance process prior to
onboarding.
222
22
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
PART 5-SPECIFIC TASKS
The contractor shall provide for the program support activities to plan, monitor, and control work
assignments to ensure that all work assignments are completed in a timely, cost effective, and
highly competent manner. The integration and coordination of all activities needed to execute the
task shall be timely, complete, and effective.
The following tasks must be conducted within the guidelines of the BLS Data Integrity
document. For more information, please see Attachment 2 – BLS Confidentiality and
Security Requirements – 2.A.3 - Data Integrity Document.
-
Task
Sub-task
Sub-task
Number
Address Refinement and
Enrollment
Address Refinement
5.1.1
Enrollment Of New Sample
5.1.2
Refusal Conversion
5.1.3
Address Refinement and Enrollment
5.1.4
Performance Measures
Multi-Modal Collection
CATI Collection
5.2.1
Web Collection
5.2.2
Fax Collection
5.2.3
Email Collection
5.2.4
Collection Performance Measures
5.2.5
Help Desk
Web Respondent Support
5.3.1
Web Edit Reconciliation and Data
5.3.2
Quality
Data Processing
5.3.3
Other Help Desk Support Activities
5.3.4
Help Desk Performance Measures
5.3.5
Training
Collection Training
5.4.1
Non-Response Prompting Training
5.4.2
Address Refinement Training
5.4.3
Enrollment Training
5.4.4
Annual Recertification
5.4.5
Other Required Training
5.4.6
Training Performance Measures
5.4.7
Quality Control
Government Quality Assurance
5.5.1
Contractor Quality Control
5.5.2
Quality Control Performance
5.5.3
Measures
Project Management
Phase-In Of Work
5.6.1
Program Support Activities
5.6.2
Phase-Out Of Work
5.6.3
23


1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
When data are to be delivered under this clause, the Contractor will be compensated for
converting the data into the prescribed form, for reproduction, and for delivery.
The Contracting Officer may release the Contractor from the requirements of this clause for
specifically identified data items at any time during the 3-year period set forth in paragraph (a) of
this clause.
(End of clause)
1.8 52.227-17 RIGHTS IN DATA--SPECIAL WORKS. (DEC 2007)
Definitions. As used in this clause--
Data means recorded information, regardless of form or the media on which it may be recorded.
The term includes technical data and computer software. The term does not include information
incidental to contract administration, such as financial, administrative, cost or pricing, or
management information.
Unlimited rights means the rights of the Government to use, disclose, reproduce, prepare
derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and display publicly, in
any manner and for any purpose, and to have or permit others to do so.
Allocation of Rights. (1) The Government shall have--
Unlimited rights in all data delivered under this contract, and in all data first produced in the
performance of this contract, except as provided in paragraph (c) of this clause.
The right to limit assertion of copyright in data first produced in the performance of this contract,
and to obtain assignment of copyright in that data, in accordance with paragraph (c)(1) of this
clause.
The right to limit the release and use of certain data in accordance with paragraph (d) of this
clause.
(2) The Contractor shall have, to the extent permission is granted in accordance with paragraph
(c)(1) of this clause, the right to assert claim to copyright subsisting in data first produced in the
performance of this contract.
Copyright--(1) Data first produced in the performance of this contract. (i) The Contractor shall
not assert or authorize others to assert any claim to copyright subsisting in any data first
produced in the performance of this contract without prior written permission of the Contracting
Officer. When copyright is asserted, the Contractor shall affix the appropriate copyright notice of
17 U.S.C. 401 or 402 and acknowledgment of Government sponsorship (including contract
number) to the data when delivered to the Government, as well as when the data are published or
deposited for registration as a published work in the U.S. Copyright Office. The Contractor
grants to the Government, and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up, nonexclusive, irrevocable,
104
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
worldwide license for all delivered data to reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies
to the public, and perform publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government.
(ii) If the Government desires to obtain copyright in data first produced in the performance of
this contract and permission has not been granted as set forth in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this clause,
the Contracting Officer shall direct the Contractor to assign (with or without registration), or
obtain the assignment of, the copyright to the Government or its designated assignee.
(2) Data not first produced in the performance of this contract. The Contractor shall not, without
prior written permission of the Contracting Officer, incorporate in data delivered under this
contract any data not first produced in the performance of this contract and that contain the
copyright notice of 17 U.S.C. 401 or 402, unless the Contractor identifies such data and grants to
the Government, or acquires on its behalf, a license of the same scope as set forth in paragraph
(c)(1) of this clause.
Release and use restrictions. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this contract, the
Contractor shall not use, release, reproduce, distribute, or publish any data first produced in the
performance of this contract, nor authorize others to do so, without written permission of the
Contracting Officer.
Indemnity. The Contractor shall indemnify the Government and its officers, agents, and
employees acting for the Government against any liability, including costs and expenses,
incurred as the result of the violation of trade secrets, copyrights, or right of privacy or publicity,
arising out of the creation, delivery, publication, or use of any data furnished under this contract;
or any libelous or other unlawful matter contained in such data. The provisions of this paragraph
do not apply unless the Government provides notice to the Contractor as soon as practicable of
any claim or suit, affords the Contractor an opportunity under applicable laws, rules, or
regulations to participate in the defense of the claim or suit, and obtains the Contractor's consent
to the settlement of any claim or suit other than as required by final decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction; and these provisions do not apply to material furnished to the Contractor
by the Government and incorporated in data to which this clause applies.
(End of clause)
1.9 FAR 52.232-18 AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS (Apr 1984)
Funds are not presently available for this contract. The Government's obligation under this
contract is contingent upon the availability of appropriated funds from which payment for
contract purposes can be made. No legal liability on the part of the Government for any payment
may arise until funds are made available to the Contracting Officer for this contract and until the
Contractor receives notice of such availability, to be confirmed in writing by the Contracting
Officer.
(End of clause)
105
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
I.10 DOL 2012-01 ORGANIZATIONAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST CLAUSE - OCI-1
EXCLUSION FROM FUTURE AGENCY CONTRACTS (DECEMBER 2012)
This clause supplements the FAR provisions on organizational conflicts of interest, located at
FAR subpart 9.500 and should be read in conjunction with these provisions. To the extent there
is any inconsistency or confusion between the two provisions, the FAR provision controls.
Work under this contract may create a future organizational conflict of interest (OCI) that could
prohibit the Contractor from competing for, or being awarded, future Government contracts.
The following examples illustrate situations in which organizational conflicts of interest may
arise. They are not all inclusive, but will be used by the Contracting Officer as general guidance
in individual contract situations:
Unequal Access to Information. The performance of this contract may provide access to
"nonpublic information," which could provide the contractor an unfair competitive advantage in
later solicitations or competitions for other DOL contracts. Such an advantage could be
perceived as unfair by a competing vendor who is not given similar access to the same nonpublic
information that is related to the future procurement action. If you, as a contractor, in performing
this contract, obtain nonpublic information that is relevant to a future procurement action, you
may be required to submit and negotiate an acceptable mitigation plan prior to being deemed
eligible to compete on the future action. Alternatively, the “nonpublic information" may be
provided to all offerors.
Biased Ground Rules. Your contract with DOL may have, in some fashion, established important
"ground rules" for another DOL procurement in which you may desire to be a competitor. For
example, this contract may involve you drafting the statement of work, specifications, or
evaluation criteria for a future DOL procurement. The primary concern, in any such situation, is
that any such firm could skew the competition, whether intentionally or not, or be perceived as
having skewed the competition, in its own favor. If the requirements of this DOL contract
anticipate the contractor may be placed in a position to establish important ground rules,
including but not limited to those described herein, the contractor may be precluded from
competing in the related action or, if possible, may be required to submit and negotiate an
acceptable mitigation plan.
Impaired Objectivity. The performance of this contract may result in the contractor being placed
in a situation where it is able, or required, to provide assessment and evaluation findings
concerning itself, another business division, a subsidiary or affiliate, or other entity with which it
has a significant financial relationship. The concern in this case is that the contractor's ability to
render impartial advice to DOL could appear to be undermined by the contractor's financial or
other business relationship to the entity whose work product is being assessed or evaluated. In
these situations, a “walling off” of lines of communication between entities or divisions may be
acceptable, but it also may not be sufficient to remove the perception that the objectivity of the
contractor has been tainted. If the requirements of the DOL procurement indicate that a
contractor may be placed in a position to provide evaluations and assessments of itself or other
entities with which it has a significant financial relationship, the affected contractor should notify
106
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
DOL immediately. The contractor may also be required to provide a mitigation plan that includes
recusal by the contractor from one of the affected contracts. Such recusal might include
divestiture of the work to a third party.
In order to prevent a future OCI of any kind, the Contractor shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
The Contractor may be excluded from competition for, or award of, any government contracts as
to which, in the course of performing another contract, the Contractor has received nonpublic
and competitively relevant information before such information has been made generally
available to other persons or firms.
The Contractor may be excluded from competition for, or award of, any government contract for
which the contractor actually assisted or participated in the development of specifications or
statements of work.
The Contractor may be excluded from competition for or award of, any government contract
which calls for it to evaluate itself, any affiliate, or any products or services produced or
performed thereby.
The Contractor may be excluded from competition for, or award of, any government contract
calling for the production or performance of any product or service for which the Contractor
participated in the development of requirements or definitions pursuant to another contract.
This clause shall not exclude the Contractor from performing work under any modification to
this contract or from competing for award of any future contract for work that is the same or
similar to work performed under this contract, so long as the conditions above are not present.
This clause does not prohibit an incumbent from competing on a follow-on competition but the
Contracting
Officer may require a mitigation plan or other steps as needed to ensure that there has not been
an unequal access to nonpublic competitively sensitive information.
The term "contractor" as used in this clause, includes any person, firm or corporation that owns
or controls, or is owned or controlled by, the contractor. The term also includes the corporate
officers of the contractor.
The agency may in its sole discretion, waive any provisions of this clause if deemed in the best
interest of the Government. The exclusions contained in this clause shall apply for the duration
of this contract and for three (3) years after completion and acceptance of all work performed
hereunder, or such other period as the Contracting Officer shall direct.
If any provision of this clause excludes the Contractor from competition for, or award of any
contract, the Contractor shall not be permitted to serve as a subcontractor, at any tier, on such
contract. This clause shall be incorporated into any subcontracts or consultant agreements
awarded under this contract unless the Contracting Officer determines otherwise.
(End of Clause)
107
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
I.11 DOL 2019-01 SECTION 508 REQUIREMENTS (JAN 2019)
A. Applicability
Contracting Officers shall insert this clause in all new solicitations and awards for the
acquisition of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) to be used by the
Department of Labor (DOL)
B. Definitions
'Information and Communication Technology' is defined as any information technology, and
other equipment, systems, technologies, or processes, for which the principal function is the
creation, manipulation, conversion, duplication, automatic acquisition, storage, display,
receipt or transmission, of electronic data and information, as well as any associated content.
Examples of ICT include, but are not limited to: Computers and peripheral equipment;
information kiosks and transaction machines; telecommunications equipment; customer
premises equipment; multifunction office machines; software; applications; Web sites;
videos; and electronic documents.
C. Requirements
Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act, as amended (29 U.S.C. 794d), applies to Federal
Agencies, and the Contractors providing support on behalf of an Agency. The Contractor is
required to provide Section 508 compliant systems and components of ICT when Federal
agencies develop, procure, maintain, or use ICT. The Contractor shall ensure that its system
and components allow Federal employees and members of the public with disabilities access
to, and use of, information and data that is comparable to the access afforded Federal
employees and members of the public without disabilities. Products, platforms and services
delivered as part of this contract action that are ICT, or contain ICT, shall conform to the
Revised Section 508 Standards, which are located at 36 C.F.R.1194.1 & Apps. A, C & D.
1. Requirements by service / contract type are as follows:
a. Custom ICT Development Services: When the Contractor provides custom ICT
development services and/or Commercially Available Off-the-Shelf (COTS) products,
pursuant to the requirements, the Contractor shall ensure the ICT fully conforms to the
applicable Revised Section 508 Standards prior to delivery and before final acceptance.
b. Installation, Configuration & Integration Services: When the Contractor provides
installation, configuration or integration services for equipment or software pursuant to
the requirement, the Contractor shall not install, configure or integrate the equipment or
software in a way that reduces the level of conformance with the applicable Revised
Section 508 Standards.
c. Maintenance Upgrades & Replacements: The Contractor shall ensure maintenance
upgrades, substitutions, and replacements to equipment and software pursuant to this
108
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
award do not reduce the approved level of conformance with the applicable Revised
Section 508 Standards at the time of award. Additionally, an updated Accessibility
Conformance Report (ACR) shall be submitted for each ICT Item, and shall be
completed according to the instructions provided by the Industry Technology Industry
Council (ITIC), in order to be considered for each option year exercise.
d. Service Personnel: The Contractor shall ensure that contractor personnel providing
support are DHS Trusted Tester or have an equivalency of the knowledge, skills, and
ability necessary to address the applicable Revised Section 508 Standards defined in the
requirement, and shall provide conformant Section 508 supporting documentation upon
request.
e. Hosting Services: The Contractor shall not implement hosting services in a manner that
reduces the existing level of conformance of the electronic content with applicable
Revised Section 508 Standards, when providing hosting services for electronic content to
the agency. Throughout the life of the award, the agency reserves the right to perform
Independent Third-Party testing on a vendor or Contractor's hosted solution to verify
conformance.
2. Validation for ICT Items: The Contractor shall test and validate the ICT solution for
conformance to the Revised Section 508 Standards, in accordance with the required
testing methods and provide test results to verify conformance of the Voluntary Product
Assessment Template (VPAT).
a. For web and software, WCAG 2.0 Level AA or WCAG 2.1 Conformance Test Results
shall be based on the Accessibility Tests for Software and Web, Harmonized Testing
Process for Section 508 Compliance.
b. For Microsoft Office and PDF documents, WCAG 2.0 Level AA or WCAG 2.1
Conformance test results shall be based on the Harmonized Testing Guidance from the
AED ACOP.
c. For ICT Items that are not electronic content, the Contractor shall validate conformance
to the applicable Revised Section 508 Standards using a defined testing process. The
Contractor shall describe test process and provide the testing results to the agency.
3. Conformance Reporting: For ICT items that are developed, updated, or configured for the
agency, and when product substitutions are offered:
a. Before acceptance, the Contractor shall provide an ACR for each ICT item that is
developed, updated, configured for the agency, and when product substitutions are
offered. The ACR should be based on the most recent version of the VPAT provided by
the Industry Technology Industry Council (ITIC) at
https://www.itic.org/policy/accessibility/vpat. An ACR shall be submitted for each ICT
Item, and shall be completed according to the instructions provided by ITIC to be
considered for acceptance.
109
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
b. Before acceptance, when the Contractor is required to perform testing to validate
conformance to the agency's accessibility requirements, the vendor shall provide a
Supplemental Accessibility Report (SAR) that contains the following information:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
V.
vi.
C.
Accessibility test results based on the required test methods
Documentation of features provided to help achieve accessibility and usability for
people with disabilities.
Documentation of core functions that cannot be accessed by persons with disabilities.
Documentation on how to configure and install the ICT item to support accessibility.
When an ICT item is an authoring tool that generates content (including documents,
reports, videos, multimedia productions, web content, etc.), provide information on
how the ICT item enables the creation of accessible electronic content that conforms
to the Revised Section 508 Standards, including the range of accessible user interface
elements the tool can create.
Before final acceptance, the Contractor shall provide a fully working demonstration
of the completed ICT Item to demonstrate conformance to the agency's accessibility
requirements. The demonstration shall expose where such conformance is and is not
achieved.
At any time, DOL reserves the right to perform Independent Third-Party testing to
validate the ICT solution provided by the Contractor, conforms to the applicable Revised
Section 508 Standards.
4. Non-Compliance: Before final acceptance of any ICT item, including updates and
replacements, DOL shall determine that the furnished ICT item is in compliance with
applicable requirements. If the furnished ICT item is determined to be non-compliant, the
Contracting Officer shall notify the Contractor of this determination, within 15 business
days of determination of non-compliance. The Contractor shall, at no cost to DOL, repair
or replace the non-compliant products or services within the period specified by the
Contracting Officer, or show evidence that as a reseller, it is actively working with the
contractor to make the product compliant.
The Contracting Officer makes the final decision to accept or not accept a Contractor's ICT item
that does not meet the stated Section 508 Standards. Where DOL determines that conformance to
requirements of the Revised Section 508 Standards would impose an undue burden or would
result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of the ICT, conformance shall be required only to
the extent that it does not impose an undue burden, or result in a fundamental alteration in the
nature of the ICT. Where ICT conforming to one or more requirements in the Revised Section
508 Standards is not commercially available, DOL shall procure the ICT that best meets the
Revised Section 508 Standards consistent with the DOL's business needs. In such cases, the
110
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Contractor shall provide alternative means of access that will enable people with disabilities to
use the product being procured.
Additional information about Section 508 accessibility standards is located at
https://www.section508.gov/
Additional information on creating accessible documents is available at
https://www.hhs.gov/web/section-508/making-files- accessible/index.html
(End of Clause)
I.12 52.232-7 - PAYMENTS UNDER TIME-AND-MATERIALS AND LABOR-HOUR CONTRACTS
(Nov 2021)
The Government will pay the Contractor as follows upon the submission of vouchers approved
by the Contracting Officer or the authorized representative:
(a) Hourly rate.
(1) Hourly rate means the rate(s) prescribed in the contract for payment for labor that
meets the labor category qualifications of a labor category specified in the contract that are-
(i) Performed by the Contractor;
(ii) Performed by the subcontractors; or
(iii) Transferred between divisions, subsidiaries, or affiliates of the Contractor under a
common control.
(2) The amounts shall be computed by multiplying the appropriate hourly rates prescribed
in the Schedule by the number of direct labor hours performed.
(3) The hourly rates shall be paid for all labor performed on the contract that meets the
labor qualifications specified in the contract. Labor hours incurred to perform tasks for which
labor qualifications were specified in the contract will not be paid to the extent the work is
performed by employees that do not meet the qualifications specified in the contract, unless
specifically authorized by the Contracting Officer.
(4) The hourly rates shall include wages, indirect costs, general and administrative
expense, and profit. Fractional parts of an hour shall be payable on a prorated basis.
(5) Vouchers may be submitted not more than once every two weeks, to the Contracting
Officer or authorized representative. A small business concern may receive more frequent
payments than every two weeks. The Contractor shall substantiate vouchers (including any
subcontractor hours reimbursed at the hourly rate in the schedule) by evidence of actual payment
and by-
111
1605C5-25-R-00002
(i) Individual daily job timekeeping records;
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(ii) Records that verify the employees meet the qualifications for the labor categories
specified in the contract; or
(iii) Other substantiation approved by the Contracting Officer.
(6) Promptly after receipt of each substantiated voucher, the Government shall, except as
otherwise provided in this contract, and subject to the terms of paragraph (e) of this clause, pay
the voucher as approved by the Contracting Officer or authorized representative.
(7) Unless otherwise prescribed in the Schedule, the Contracting Officer may unilaterally
issue a contract modification requiring the Contractor to withhold amounts from its billings until
a reserve is set aside in an amount that the Contracting Officer considers necessary to protect the
Government's interests. The Contracting Officer may require a withhold of 5 percent of the
amounts due under paragraph (a) of this clause, but the total amount withheld for the
contract shall not exceed $50,000. The amounts withheld shall be retained until the Contractor
executes and delivers the release required by paragraph (g) of this clause.
(8) Unless the Schedule prescribes otherwise, the hourly rates in the Schedule shall not be
varied by virtue of the Contractor having performed work on an overtime basis. If
no overtime rates are provided in the Schedule and overtime work is approved in advance by
the Contracting Officer, overtime rates shall be negotiated. Failure to agree upon
these overtime rates shall be treated as a dispute under the Disputes clause of this contract. If the
Schedule provides rates for overtime, the premium portion of those rates will be reimbursable
only to the extent the overtime is approved by the Contracting Officer.
(b) Materials.
(1) For the purposes of this clause-
(i) Direct materials means those materials that enter directly into the end product, or
that are used or consumed directly in connection with the furnishing of the end product or
service.
(ii) Materials means-
(A) Direct materials, including supplies transferred between divisions,
subsidiaries, or affiliates of the Contractor under a common control;
(B) Subcontracts for supplies and incidental services for which there is not a labor
category specified in the contract;
(C) Other direct costs (e.g., incidental services for which there is not a labor
category specified in the contract, travel, computer usage charges, etc.); and
112
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(D) Applicable indirect costs.
(2) If the Contractor furnishes its own materials that meet the definition of a commercial
product or commercial service in Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) 2.101, the price to be
paid for such materials shall not exceed the Contractor's established catalog or market price,
adjusted to reflect the-
(i) Quantities being acquired; and
(ii) Actual cost of any modifications necessary because of contract requirements.
(3) Except as provided for in paragraph (b)(2) of this clause, the Government will
reimburse the Contractor for allowable cost of materials provided the Contractor-
(i) Has made payments for materials in accordance with the terms and conditions of
the agreement or invoice; or
(ii) Ordinarily makes these payments within 30 days of the submission of the
Contractor's payment request to the Government and such payment is in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the agreement or invoice.
(4) Payment for materials is subject to the Allowable Cost and Payment clause of this
contract. The Contracting Officer will determine allowable costs of materials in accordance with
FAR subpart 31.2 in effect on the date of this contract.
(5) The Contractor may include allocable indirect costs and other direct costs to the
extent they are-
(i) Comprised only of costs that are clearly excluded from the hourly rate;
(ii) Allocated in accordance with the Contractor's written or established accounting
practices; and
(iii) Indirect costs are not applied to subcontracts that are paid at the hourly rates.
(6) To the extent able, the Contractor shall-
(i) Obtain materials at the most advantageous prices available with due regard to
securing prompt delivery of satisfactory materials; and
(ii) Take all cash and trade discounts, rebates, allowances, credits, salvage,
commissions, and other benefits. When unable to take advantage of the benefits, the
Contractor shall promptly notify the Contracting Officer and give the reasons. The
Contractor shall give credit to the Government for cash and trade discounts, rebates, scrap,
commissions, and other amounts that have accrued to the benefit of the Contractor, or would
have accrued except for the fault or neglect of the Contractor. The Contractor shall not deduct
113


1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
from gross costs the benefits lost without fault or neglect on the part of the Contractor, or lost
through fault of the Government.
(7) Except as provided for in 31.205-26(e) and (f), the Government will not pay profit or
fee to the prime Contractor on materials.
(c) If the Contractor enters into any subcontract that requires consent under the clause
at 52.244-2, Subcontracts, without obtaining such consent, the Government is not required to
reimburse the Contractor for any costs incurred under the subcontract prior to the date the
Contractor obtains the required consent. Any reimbursement of subcontract costs incurred prior
to the date the consent was obtained shall be at the sole discretion of the Government.
(d) Total cost. It is estimated that the total cost to the Government for the performance of this
contract shall not exceed the ceiling price set forth in the Schedule, and the Contractor agrees to
use its best efforts to perform the work specified in the Schedule and all obligations under this
contract within such ceiling price. If at any time the Contractor has reason to believe that the
hourly rate payments and material costs that will accrue in performing this contract in the next
succeeding 30 days, if added to all other payments and costs previously accrued, will exceed 85
percent of the ceiling price in the Schedule, the Contractor shall notify the Contracting
Officer giving a revised estimate of the total price to the Government for performing this
contract with supporting reasons and documentation. If at any time during performing this
contract, the Contractor has reason to believe that the total price to the Government for
performing this contract will be substantially greater or less than the then stated ceiling price, the
Contractor shall so notify the Contracting Officer, giving a revised estimate of the total price for
performing this contract, with supporting reasons and documentation. If at any time during
performing this contract, the Government has reason to believe that the work to be required in
performing this contract will be substantially greater or less than the stated ceiling price,
the Contracting Officer will so advise the Contractor, giving the then revised estimate of the total
amount of effort to be required under the contract.
(e) Ceiling price. The Government will not be obligated to pay the Contractor any amount in
excess of the ceiling price in the Schedule, and the Contractor shall not be obligated to continue
performance if to do so would exceed the ceiling price set forth in the Schedule, unless and until
the Contracting Officer notifies the Contractor in writing that the ceiling price has been increased
and specifies in the notice a revised ceiling that shall constitute the ceiling price for performance
under this contract. When and to the extent that the ceiling price set forth in the Schedule has
been increased, any hours expended and material costs incurred by the Contractor in excess of
the ceiling price before the increase shall be allowable to the same extent as if the hours
expended and material costs had been incurred after the increase in the ceiling price.
(f) Audit. At any time before final payment under this contract, the Contracting
Officer may request audit of the vouchers and supporting documentation. Each payment
previously made shall be subject to reduction to the extent of amounts, on preceding vouchers,
that are found by the Contracting Officer or authorized representative not to have been properly
payable and shall also be subject to reduction for overpayments or to increase for
underpayments. Upon receipt and approval of the voucher designated by the Contractor as the
114
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
"completion voucher" and supporting documentation, and upon compliance by the Contractor
with all terms of this contract (including, without limitation, terms relating to patents and the
terms of paragraph (g) of this clause), the Government shall promptly pay any balance due the
Contractor. The completion voucher, and supporting documentation, shall be submitted by the
Contractor as promptly as practicable following completion of the work under this contract, but
in no event later than 120 days (or such longer period as the Contracting Officer may approve in
writing) from the date of completion.
(g) Assignment and Release of Claims. The Contractor, and each assignee under an
assignment entered into under this contract and in effect at the time of final payment under this
contract, shall execute and deliver, at the time of and as a condition precedent to final payment
under this contract, a release discharging the Government, its officers, agents, and employees of
and from all liabilities, obligations, and claims arising out of or under this contract, subject only
to the following exceptions:
(1) Specified claims in stated amounts, or in estimated amounts if the amounts are not
susceptible of exact statement by the Contractor.
(2) Claims, together with reasonable incidental expenses, based upon the liabilities of the
Contractor to third parties arising out of performing this contract, that are not known to the
Contractor on the date of the execution of the release, and of which the Contractor gives notice in
writing to the Contracting Officer not more than 6 years after the date of the release or the date
of any notice to the Contractor that the Government is prepared to make final payment,
whichever is earlier.
(3) Claims for reimbursement of costs (other than expenses of the Contractor by reason of
its indemnification of the Government against patent liability), including reasonable incidental
expenses, incurred by the Contractor under the terms of this contract relating to patents.
(h) Interim payments on contracts for other than services.
(1) Interim payments made prior to the final payment under the contract are contract
financing payments. Contract financing payments are not subject to the interest penalty
provisions of the Prompt Payment Act.
the
(2) The designated payment office will make interim payments for contract financing on
[Contracting Officer insert day as prescribed by agency head; if not prescribed,
insert "30th ] day after the designated billing office receives a proper payment request. In the
event that the Government requires an audit or other review of a specific payment request to
ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the contract, the designated payment office
is not compelled to make payment by the specified due date.
(i) Interim payments on contracts for services. For interim payments made prior to the final
payment under this contract, the Government will make payment in accordance with the Prompt
Payment Act (31 U.S.C. 3903) and prompt payment regulations at 5 CFR part 1315.
115
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
I.13 DOL-2023-03 Submission of Invoices – BLS Accounting Version (August 2023)
A. Applicability
Contracting Officers shall insert this clause in all solicitations and awards for the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS). For existing awards, the Contracting Officer will determine whether the
contract action should be modified to incorporate the clause.
B. Definitions
None
C. Requirements
1. Electronic Invoice Submittal
Electronic Invoice Submittal Invoices for the services/goods provided under this award shall be
submitted through:
The Department of Treasury's Invoice Processing Platform (IPP)
IPP is a Federal Government owned and operated website accessible to contractors free of
charge. Information about IPP, including enrollment instructions, are available and should be
obtained by the enrolled contractors directly from the Department of Treasury after award at,
https://www.ipp.gov.
Per TFM Vol 1, part 4A, Chapter 200: Section 2055-Electronic Invoicing, Invoice Processing
Platform (IPP)
Federal entities should consider using electronic systems and processes to streamline and
improve efficiencies in government invoicing. IPP is a secure web-based electronic invoicing
and payment information system provided by Fiscal Service. IPP allows federal entities to
transform their existing paper-based order-to-pay processes into a streamlined electronic flow.
IPP provides a centralized location to view all transactions in the purchase-to-pay process. It
transforms paper-based processes into an electronic process for both federal entities and their
suppliers. IPP's modular design allows federal entities to implement functionality in phases,
according to their business needs. Federal entities use IPP to send electronic contracts to vendors,
to receive electronic invoices from vendors, and for invoice routing and approval workflow. IPP
uploads payment remittance information from Treasury and non-Treasury disbursed federal
entities, allowing federal entities and their suppliers to view and download payment information.
Χ
The Department of Labor (DOL) Quickpay DOL-BLS@quickpay.dol.gov.
116
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
A. The following instructions apply to Invoices submitted through IPP.Gov or the DOL
Quickpay email system:
IPP invoice attachments SHALL NOT exceed the size limit of 10 megabytes (MB) each.
All IPP submissions should have the invoice attached to avoid rejection. However, you may
submit multiple attachments of less than 10MB each with the invoices.
(i) DO NOT submit an invoice or attachment that uses shading or color.
a. An emailed Portable Document Format (PDF) image cannot have any text that has a
background with any color other than white. If the image has a shaded background, it will be
converted to black, and the text will be illegible.
b. An emailed Tagged Image File Format (TIFF) image must be black and white.
(ii) Quickpay users SHALL: provide a copy of the invoice and any attachments via email to the
quickpay email address listed on the contract. In some instances, invoices must be submitted to
the COR before submitting to quickpay. The contract will specify if the COR should receive a
copy of the invoice before submitting to quickpay.
(iii) Users SHALL NOT: submit more than one attachment per invoice and the attachment shall
not exceed 10MB. Any additional attachments will not be recognized.
(iv) DO NOT submit more than one invoice at a time.
(v) DO NOT attempt to use the Recall or Resend email message feature.
B. Electronic invoices shall be in PDF or TIFF format.
2. Paper Invoices shall be submitted via fax or U.S. mail
Paper invoices may be sent via fax to:
(202)691-7796
Mail paper invoices to:
U.S. Department of Labor
Bureau of Labor Statistics
Room 4135
2 Massachusetts Avenue N.E.
Washington, DC 20212
117
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
3. General Information
Payment due date is to be calculated from the date the invoice is received in accordance with
FAR 32.905 and the instructions above.
Inquiries regarding invoices must be emailed to BLSInvoiceInquiry@bls.gov. The relevant
invoice must be attached to the inquiry email and the subject line of the email must state
INQUIRY, as shown in the following example:
INQUIRY: Contractor Name, DOL Agency, Contract Number, BPA Call or Order Number,
Invoice Number, Invoice Amount
The contractor SHALL NOT use the DOL electronic invoicing email address for inquiries about
any invoice.
Questions
All questions regarding Electronic Invoicing shall be sent to the BLS Financial Officer at
BLSInvoice Inquiry@bls.gov.
(End of Clause)
I.14 DOL 2018-02 DOL MANDATORY TRAINING REQUIREMENTS FOR
CONTRACTOR EMPLOYEES (AUGUST 2018)
Definitions: None
Requirements:
Where required and applicable, contractor employees, including employees of subcontractors at
any tier, shall complete any DOL designated and hosted training, that the Contracting Officer's
Representative (COR) identifies as mandatory. Training shall be completed in a timeframe
specified by the COR.
Time spent on training shall be counted as regular hours worked.
Flowdown of requirements to subcontractors
The Contractor shall ensure this clause is incorporated in all subcontracts, at any tier.
(End of Clause)
I.15 DOL 2015-03 INTERNET PROTOCOL VERSION 6 (IPV6) CLAUSE (MAY 2015)
Any system or product that includes: hardware, software, firmware, and/or networked
components including but not limited to voice, video, or data that is developed, procured, or
118
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
acquired in support and/or performance of this requirement shall be capable of transmitting,
receiving, processing, or forwarding digital information across system boundaries that are
formatted in accordance with commercial standards of Internet Protocol (IP) version 6 (IPv6) as
set forth in the USGv6 Profile (NIST Special Publication 500-267) and corresponding
declarations of conformance defined in the USGv6 Test Program.
This IPv6 capable system or product shall maintain interoperability with IPv4 systems and
provide the same level of performance and reliability capabilities of IPv4 systems.
This IPv6 capable system or product shall have available IPv4 and IPv6 technical support for
development, implementation, and troubleshooting of the system.
This IPv6 capable system or product can be upgraded, or the vendor will provide an appropriate
migration path for industry- required changes to IPv6 as the technology evolves, at no additional
cost to the Government.
This IPv6 capable system or product must be able to operate on networks supporting IPv4 &
IPv6, as well as networks that support both.
Any system or product whose IPv6 non-compliance is discovered and made known to the
vendor/contractor within 12 months of the start of performance shall be upgraded, modified,
replaced, or brought in to compliance at no additional cost to the Federal Government.
(End of clause)
I.16 DOLAR 2952.201-70 CONTRACTING OFFICER'S REPRESENTATIVE (COR)
CLAUSE
A Contracting Officer's Representative (COR) will be delegated upon award. A copy of the
delegation memorandum will be provided to the COR and a delegation letter sent to the vendor.
The COR is responsible, as applicable, for receiving all deliverables; inspecting and accepting
the supplies or services provided hereunder in accordance with the terms and conditions of this
contract; providing direction to the contractor which clarifies the contract effort, fills in details or
otherwise serves to accomplish the contractual scope of work; evaluating performance; and
certifying all invoices/vouchers for acceptance of the supplies or services furnished for payment.
The COR does not have the authority to alter the contractor's obligations under the contract,
and/or modify any of the expressed terms, conditions, specifications, or cost of the agreement. If,
as a result of technical discussions, it is desirable to alter/change contractual obligations or the
scope of work, the contracting officer must issue such changes.
(End Clause)
119
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
I.17 DOL 2012-02 CONTRACTOR'S OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY THE CONTRACTING
OFFICER OF A REQUEST TO CHANGE THE CONTRACT SCOPE
(CONTRACTOR'S OBLIGATION CLAUSE)
(a) Except for changes identified in writing and signed by the Contracting Officer, the Contractor
is required to notify, within five working days of receipt or knowledge, any request for changes
to this contract (including actions, inactions, and written or oral communications) that the
Contractor regards as exceeding the scope of the contract. On the basis of the most accurate
information available to the Contractor, the notice shall state:
The date, nature, and circumstances of the conduct regarded as a change in scope;
The name, function, and activity of each Government individual and Contractor official or
employee involved in, or knowledgeable about, such conduct;
The identification of any documents and substance of any oral communication involved in such
conduct;
Following submission of this notice, the Contractor shall continue performance in accordance
with the contract terms and conditions, unless notified otherwise by the Contracting Officer.
The Contracting Officer shall promptly, within 5 business days after receipt of notice from the
Contractor, respond to the notice in writing. In responding, the Contracting Officer shall either:
Confirm that the Contractor's notice identifies a change in the scope of the contract and directs
the Contractor to stop work, completely or in part, in accordance with the Stop Work provisions
of the contract;
Deny that the Contractor's notice identifies a change in scope and instruct the Contractor to
continue performance under the contract; or
In the event the Contractor's notice does not provide sufficient information to make a decision,
advise the Contractor what additional information is required, and establish the date by which it
should be furnished and the date thereafter by which the Government will respond.
(End of clause)
I.18 DOL 2014-04 LIMITATION OF GOVERNMENT'S OBLIGATION (LOGO) - (JULY
2014)
Contract fixed price line item(s) are incrementally funded. For these item(s), the sum of
$TBD of the total price is presently available for payment and allotted to this contract. An
allotment schedule is set forth in paragraph (j) of this clause.
For item(s) identified in paragraph (a) of this clause, the Contractor agrees to perform up to the
point at which the total amount payable by the Government, including reimbursement in the
120
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
event of termination of those item(s) for the Government's convenience, approximates the total
amount currently allotted to the contract. The Contractor is not authorized to continue work on
those item(s) beyond that point. The Government will not be obligated in any event to reimburse
the Contractor in excess of the amount allotted to the contract for those item(s) regardless of
anything to the contrary in the clause entitled "Termination for Convenience of the
Government." As used in this clause, the total amount payable by the Government in the event of
termination of applicable contract line item(s) for convenience includes costs, profit, and
estimated termination settlement costs for those item(s).
Notwithstanding the dates specified in the allotment schedule in paragraph (j) of this clause, the
Contractor will notify the Contracting Officer in writing at least thirty days prior to the date
when, in the Contractor's best judgment, the work will reach the point at which the total amount
payable by the Government, including any cost for termination for convenience, will
approximate 80 percent of the total amount presently allotted to the contract for performance of
the applicable item(s). The notification will state (1) the estimated date when that point will be
reached and (2) an estimate of additional funding, if any, needed to continue performance of
applicable line items up to the next scheduled date for allotment of funds identified in paragraph
(j) of this clause, or to a mutually agreed upon substitute date. The notification will also advise
the Contracting Officer of the estimated amount of additional funds that will be required for the
timely performance of the item(s) funded pursuant to this clause, for a subsequent period as may
be specified in the allotment schedule in paragraph (j) of this clause or otherwise agreed to by the
parties. If after such notification additional funds are not allotted by the date identified in the
Contractor's notification, or by an agreed substitute date, the Contracting Officer will terminate
any item(s) for which additional funds have not been allotted, pursuant to the clause of this
contract entitled "Termination for Convenience of the Government."
When additional funds are allotted for continued performance of the contract line item(s)
identified in paragraph (a) of this clause, the parties will agree as to the period of contract
performance which will be covered by the funds. The provisions of paragraphs (b) through (d) of
this clause will apply in like manner to the additional allotted funds and agreed substitute date,
and the contract will be modified accordingly.
If, solely by reason of failure of the Government to allot additional funds, by the dates indicated
below, in amounts sufficient for timely performance of the contract line item(s) identified in
paragraph (a) of this clause, the Contractor incurs additional costs or is delayed in the
performance of the work under this contract and if additional funds are allotted, an equitable
adjustment will be made in the price or prices (including appropriate target, billing, and ceiling
prices where applicable) of the item(s), or in the time of delivery, or both. Failure to agree to any
such equitable adjustment hereunder will be a dispute concerning a question of fact within the
meaning of the clause entitled “Disputes.” In no event shall the equitable adjustment be more
than the contract line item(s) price(s) in question.
The Government may at any time prior to termination allot additional funds for the performance
of the contract line item(s) identified in paragraph (a) of this clause.
121
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The termination provisions of this clause do not limit the rights of the Government under the
clause entitled "Default.” The provisions of this clause are limited to the work and allotment of
funds for the contract line item(s) set forth in paragraph (a) of this clause. This clause no longer
applies once the contract is fully funded except with regard to the rights or obligations of the
parties concerning equitable adjustments negotiated under paragraphs (d) and (e) of this clause.
Nothing in this clause affects the right of the Government to terminate this contract pursuant to
the clause of this contract entitled "Termination for Convenience of the Government."
Nothing in this clause shall be construed as authorization of voluntary services whose acceptance
is otherwise prohibited under 31
U.S.C. 1342.
The parties contemplate that the Government will allot funds to this contract in accordance with
the following schedule: On execution of contract: TBD
The remaining amount will be allotted: TBD
(End of clause)
I.19 DOL 2018-01 PRIVACY BREACH NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS - (APRIL
2018)
Definitions
"Breach" is defined as the loss of control, compromise, unauthorized disclosure, unauthorized
acquisition, or any similar occurrence where--
A person other than an authorized user accesses or potentially accesses Personally Identifiable
Information (PII); or
An authorized user accesses or potentially accesses PII for an unauthorized purpose.
"Information" is defined as any communication or representation of knowledge such as facts,
data, or opinions in any medium or form, including textual, numerical, graphic, cartographic,
narrative, electronic, or audiovisual forms (See Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
Circular No. A-130, Managing Federal Information as a Strategic Resource).
"Information System" is defined as a discrete set of information resources organized for the
collection, processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination, or disposition of information
(44 U.S.C. 3502).
"Personally Identifiable Information" is defined as information that can be used to distinguish or
trace an individual's identity, either alone or when combined with other information that is linked
or linkable to a specific individual. (See Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No.
A-130, Managing Federal Information as a Strategic Resource).
Requirements
122
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Contractors and subcontractors who collects or maintains Federal information on behalf of the
agency, or uses or operates an information system on behalf of the agency, shall comply with
Federal law e.g., FISMA 2014, E-Government Act and the Privacy Act. Additionally, the
Contractor shall meet OMB directives and National Institute of Standards and Technology
Standards to ensure processing of PII is adequately managed.
The contractor shall:
Properly encrypt PII in accordance with appropriate laws, regulations, directives, standards or
guidelines;
Report to DOL any suspected or confirmed breach in any medium or form, including paper, oral,
and electronic within one hour of discovery;
Cooperate with and exchange information with DOL (Contracting Officer and Contracting
Officer's Representative) as well as allow for an inspection, investigation, forensic analysis, as
determined necessary by the DOL, in order to effectively report and manage a suspected or
confirmed breach;
Maintain capabilities to determine what DOL information was or could have been compromised
and by whom, construct a timeline of user activity, determine methods and techniques used to
access Federal information, and identify the initial attack vector;
Ensure staff that have access to DOL systems or information are regularly trained to identify and
report a security incident. This includes the completion of any DOL mandatory training for
contractors;
Take steps to address security issues that have been identified, including steps to minimize
further security risks to those individuals whose PII was lost, compromised, or potentially
compromised.
Report incidents per DOL incident management policy and US-CERT notification guidelines.
Remedy:
A report of a breach shall not, by itself, be interpreted as evidence that the Contractor or its
subcontractor (at any tier) failed to provide adequate safeguards for PII. If the Contractor is
determined to be at fault for the breach, the Contractor may be financially liable for Government
costs incurred in the course of breach response and mitigation efforts;
The contractor shall take steps to address security issues that have been identified, including
steps to minimize further security risks to those individuals whose PII was lost, compromised, or
potentially compromised; Additionally, the individual or individuals directly responsible for the
data breach shall be removed from the contract within 45 days of the breach of data;
123


1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The Government reserves the right to exercise all available contract remedies including, but not
limited to, a stop-work order on a temporary or permanent basis in order to address a breach or
upon discovery of a Contractor's failure to report a breach as required by this clause. If the
Contractor is determined to be at fault for a breach, the contractor shall provide credit monitoring
and privacy protection services for one year to any individual whose private information was
accessed or disclosed. The individual shall be given the option, but the decision is theirs. Those
services will be provided solely at the expense of the contractor, and will not be reimbursed by
the federal government.
6
(End of Clause)
1.20 DOL 2020-01 - Contractor Personnel Telework (JANUARY 2020)
A.
Applicability
Contracting Officers shall insert this clause in all solicitations and awards for services, including
construction.
B.
C.
Definitions None
Requirements
Contractors Personnel Telework:
1. Telework for contractor personnel may be authorized on an ad hoc or routine basis in
accordance with the contract action terms and conditions, coordination between the contracting
officer's representative (COR) and the contractor's program manager, and written approval by
the COR.
2.
a.
When authorized to telework, the following shall apply:
Contractor personnel authorized to telework will be provided the Department of Labor
(DOL) equipment for secure authenticated access. No other equipment is authorized for use
when teleworking.
b.
Contractor personnel must employ appropriate safeguards and comply with all applicable
DOL and Federal policies, specification/ requirements, and procedures related to Personally
Identifiable Information, security, network, data, and communications.
C.
The Government shall not provide or reimburse contractor personnel for internet
connectivity.
(End of Clause)
124
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
I.21 DOL 2018-03 - RECORDS MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS (AUGUST 2018)
A. Applicability
The Contracting Officer shall insert this clause in all solicitations and awards in which the
Contractor creates, works with, or otherwise handles Federal records, as defined in Section B,
regardless of the medium in which the record exists.
B. Definitions
'Federal record' as defined in 44 U.S.C. 3301, includes all recorded information, regardless of
form or characteristics, made or received by a Federal agency under Federal law or in connection
with the transaction of public business and preserved or appropriate for preservation by that
agency or its legitimate successor as evidence of the organization, functions, policies, decisions,
procedures, operations, or other activities of the United States Government or because of the
informational value of data in them.
The term Federal record:
1. Includes Department of Labor (DOL) records.
2. Does not include personal materials.
3. Applies to records created, received, or maintained by Contractors pursuant to their DOL
contract.
4. May include deliverables and documentation associated with deliverables.
C. Requirements
1. Contractor shall comply with all applicable records management laws and regulations, as well
as National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) records policies, including but not
limited to the Federal Records Act (44 U.S.C. chs. 21, 29, 31, 33), NARA regulations at 36 CFR
Chapter XII Subchapter B, and those policies associated with the safeguarding of records
covered by the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C. 552a). These policies include the preservation of
all records, regardless of form or characteristics, mode of transmission, or state of completion.
2. In accordance with 36 CFR 1222.32(b), all data created for Government use and delivered to,
or falling under the legal control of, the Government are Federal records subject to the provisions
of 44 U.S.C. chapters 21, 29, 31, and 33, the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) (5 U.S.C. 552),
as amended, and the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C. 552a), as amended and must be managed and
scheduled for disposition only as permitted by statute or regulation.
3. In accordance with 36 CFR 1222.32, Contractor shall maintain all records created for
Government use or created in the course of performing the contract and/or delivered to, or under
the legal control of the Government and must be managed in accordance with Federal law.
125
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Electronic records and associated metadata must be accompanied by sufficient technical
documentation to permit understanding and use of the records and data.
4. DOL and its contractors are responsible for preventing the alienation or unauthorized
destruction of records, including all forms of mutilation. Records may not be removed from the
legal custody of DOL or destroyed except for in accordance with the provisions of the applicable
agency schedules and with the written concurrence of the Head of the Contracting Activity in
consultation with the Agency Records Officer. Willful and unlawful destruction, removal,
damage or alienation of Federal records is subject to the fines and penalties imposed by 18
U.S.C. 2701. In the event of any unlawful or accidental removal, defacing, alteration, or
destruction of records, Contractor must report to DOL. The agency must report the incident
directly to their Agency Records Officer. The Agency Records Officer will engage the
Departmental Records Officer who will follow procedures promptly to NARA in accordance
with 36 CFR 1230.
5. The Contractor shall immediately notify the appropriate Contracting Officer upon discovery of
any inadvertent or unauthorized disclosures of information, data, documentary materials, records
or equipment. Disclosure of non-public information is limited to authorized personnel with a
need-to-know as described in the contract. The Contractor shall ensure that the appropriate
personnel, administrative, technical, and physical safeguards are established to ensure the
security and confidentiality of this information, data, documentary material, records and/or
equipment is properly protected. The Contractor shall not remove material from Government
facilities or systems, or facilities or systems operated or maintained on the Government's behalf,
without the express written permission of the Head of the Contracting Activity. When
information, data, documentary material, records and/or equipment is no longer required, it shall
be returned to DOL's control or the Contractor must hold it until otherwise directed. Items
returned to the Government shall be hand carried, mailed, emailed, or securely electronically
transmitted to the Contracting Officer or address prescribed in the contract. Destruction of
records is EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED unless in accordance with Paragraph (4).
6. The Contractor is required to obtain the Contracting Officer's approval prior to engaging in
any contractual relationship (sub-contractor) in support of this contract requiring the disclosure
of information, documentary material and/or records generated under, or relating to, contracts.
The Contractor (and any sub-contractor) is required to abide by Government and DOL guidance
for protecting sensitive, proprietary information, classified, and controlled unclassified
information.
7. The Contractor shall only use Government IT equipment for purposes specifically tied to or
authorized by the contract and in accordance with DOL policy.
8. The Contractor shall not create or maintain any records containing any non-public DOL
information that are not specifically tied to or authorized by the contract.
9. The Contractor shall not retain, use, sell, or disseminate copies of any deliverable that contains
information covered by the Privacy Act of 1974 or that which is generally protected from public
disclosure by an exemption to the Freedom of Information Act.
126
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
10. [Insert the following if no other data rights clause has been included in the contract] The
DOL owns the rights to all data and records produced as part of this contract. All deliverables
under the contract are the property of the U.S. Government for which DOL shall have unlimited
rights to use, dispose of, or disclose such data contained therein as it determines to be in the
public interest. Any Contractor rights in the data or deliverables must be identified as required by
FAR 52.227-11 through FAR 52.227-20.
11. Training. All Contractor employees assigned to this contract who create, work with, or
otherwise handle records are required to take the annual mandatory records management
training, which will be provided by DOL, as directed by the Contracting Officer's Representative
(COR). The training shall be completed in a timeframe specified by the COR. The Contractor is
responsible for confirming training has been completed according to agency policies, including
initial training and any annual or refresher training.
D. Flowdown of requirements to subcontractors
1. The Contractor shall incorporate the substance of this clause, its terms and requirements
including this paragraph, in all subcontracts under this contract and require written subcontractor
acknowledgment of same.
2. Violation by a subcontractor of any provision set forth in this clause will be attributed to the
Contractor
(END OF SECTION I)
SECTION J- CONTRACT DOCUMENTS, EXHIBITS, SPECIAL CONTRACT
REQUIREMENTS AND OTHER ATTACHMENTS
Attachment
Number
Document Name
Number
of Pages
RFP Attachment 1
Past Performance Questionnaire
6
Document
Туре
Word
Document
Date
5/20/2025
Document
RFP Attachment 2
Security Requirements
RFP Attachment 3
BLS Confidentiality and
Pricing Sheet CES
20
Word
5/20/2025
Document
Excel
5/20/2025
RFP Attachment 4
RFP Attachment 5
RFP Question and Answer
Excel
5/20/2025
Quality Assurance Surveillance
Plan (QASP)
5
Word
5/20/2025
RFP Attachment 6
Small Business Subcontracting
Excel
5/20/2025
Plan Template
(END OF SECTION J)
127
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
SECTION K- REPRESENTATIONS, CERTIFICATIONS, AND OTHER STATEMENTS
OF BIDDERS
K.1 FAR 52.233-2 – SERVICE OF PROTEST (SEPT 2006)
(a) Protests, as defined in section 33.101 of the Federal Acquisition Regulation, that are filed
directly with an agency, and copies of any protests that are filed with the Government
Accountability Office (GAO), shall be served on the Contracting Officer (addressed as follows)
by obtaining written and dated acknowledgment of receipt from
[Contracting Officer designate the official or location where a protest may be served on
the Contracting Officer.]
(b) The copy of any protest shall be received in the office designated above within one day of
filing a protest with the GAO.
(End of provision)
K.2 FAR 52.204-8 – ANNUAL REPRESENTATIONS AND CERTIFICATIONS (JAN
2025)
(a)
(1)The North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code for
this acquisition is
[insert NAICS code].
[insert size standard].
(2)The small business size standard is
(3)The small business size standard for a concern that submits an offer, other than on
a construction or service acquisition, but proposes to furnish an end item that it did not itself
manufacture, process, or produce is 500 employees, or 150 employees for information
technology value-added resellers under NAICS code 541519 if the acquisition-
(i) Is set aside for small business and has a value above the simplified acquisition threshold;
(ii) Uses the HUBZone price evaluation preference regardless of dollar value, unless
the offeror waives the price evaluation preference; or
(iii)Is an 8(a), HUBZone, service-disabled veteran-owned, economically disadvantaged women-
owned, or women-owned small business set-aside or sole-source award regardless of dollar
value.
(b)
(1)If the provision at 52.204-7, System for Award Management, is included in this solicitation,
paragraph (d) of this provision applies.
(2) If the provision at 52.204-7, System for Award Management, is not included in
this solicitation, and the Offeror has an active registration in the System for Award Management
(SAM), the Offeror may choose to use paragraph (d) of this provision instead of completing the
corresponding individual representations and certifications in the solicitation.
The Offeror shall indicate which option applies by checking one of the following boxes:
(i) Paragraph (d) applies.
(ii) Paragraph (d) does not apply and the offeror has completed the individual representations
and certifications in the solicitation.
128
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(c)
(1)The following representations or certifications in SAM are applicable to this solicitation as
indicated:
(i)52.203-2, Certificate of Independent Price Determination. This provision applies
to solicitations when a firm-fixed-price contract or fixed-price contract with economic price
adjustment is contemplated, unless-
(A)The acquisition is to be made under the simplified acquisition procedures in part 13;
(B)The solicitation is a request for technical proposals under two-step sealed bidding procedures;
or
(C)The solicitation is for utility services for which rates are set by law or regulation.
(ii)52.203-11, Certification and Disclosure Regarding Payments to Influence Certain Federal
Transactions. This provision applies to solicitations expected to exceed $150,000.
(iii)52.203-18, Prohibition on Contracting with Entities that Require Certain Internal
Confidentiality Agreements or Statements-Representation. This provision applies to
all solicitations.
(iv)52.204-3, Taxpayer Identification. This provision applies to solicitations that do not include
the provision at 52.204-7, System for Award Management.
(v)52.204-5, Women-Owned Business (Other Than Small Business). This provision applies
to solicitations that-
(A)Are not set aside for small business concerns;
(B)Exceed the simplified acquisition threshold; and
(C)Are for contracts that will be performed in the United States or its outlying areas.
(vi)52.204-26, Covered Telecommunications Equipment or Services-Representation. This
provision applies to all solicitations.
(vii)52.209-2, Prohibition on Contracting with Inverted Domestic Corporations-Representation.
(viii)52.209-5, Certification Regarding Responsibility Matters. This provision applies
to solicitations where the contract value is expected to exceed the simplified acquisition
threshold.
(ix)52.209-11, Representation by Corporations Regarding Delinquent Tax Liability or a
Felony Conviction under any Federal Law. This provision applies to all solicitations.
(x)52.214-14, Place of Performance-Sealed Bidding. This provision applies to invitations for
bids except those in which the place of performance is specified by the Government.
(xi)52.215-6, Place of Performance. This provision applies to solicitations unless the place of
performance is specified by the Government.
(xii)52.219-1, Small Business Program Representations (Basic, Alternates I, and II). This
provision applies to solicitations when the contract is for supplies to be delivered or services to
be performed in the United States or its outlying areas, or when the contracting officer has
applied part 19 in accordance with 19.000(b)(1)(ii).
(A)The basic provision applies when the solicitations are issued by other than DoD, NASA, and
the Coast Guard.
(B)The provision with its Alternate I applies to solicitations issued by DoD, NASA, or the Coast
Guard.
(C)The provision with its Alternate II applies to solicitations that will result in a multiple-award
contract with more than one NAICS code assigned.
(xiii)52.219-2, Equal Low Bids. This provision applies to solicitations when contracting by
sealed bidding and the contract is for supplies to be delivered or services to be performed in
129
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
the United States or its outlying areas, or when the contracting officer has applied part 19 in
accordance with 19.000(b)(1)(ii).
(xiv)52.222-22, Previous Contracts and Compliance Reports. This provision applies
to solicitations that include the clause at 52.222-26, Equal Opportunity.
(xv)52.222-25, Affirmative Action Compliance. This provision applies to solicitations, other
than those for construction, when the solicitation includes the clause at 52.222-26, Equal
Opportunity.
(xvi)52.222-38, Compliance with Veterans' Employment Reporting Requirements. This
provision applies to solicitations when it is anticipated the contract award will exceed
the simplified acquisition threshold and the contract is not for acquisition of commercial
products or commercial services.
(xvii)52.223-1, Biobased Product Certification. This provision applies to solicitations that
require the delivery or specify the use of biobased products in USDA-designated product
categories; or include the clause at 52.223-2, Reporting of Biobased Products Under Service
and Construction Contracts.
(xviii)52.223-4, Recovered Material Certification. This provision applies to solicitations that are
for, or specify the use of, EPA-designated items.
(xix)52.223-22, Public Disclosure of Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Reduction Goals-
Representation. This provision applies to solicitations that include the provision at 52.204-7.
(xx)52.225-2, Buy American Certificate. This provision applies to solicitations containing the
clause at 52.225-1.
(xxi)52.225-4, Buy American-Free Trade Agreements-Israeli Trade Act Certificate.
(Basic, Alternates II and III.) This provision applies to solicitations containing the clause
at 52.225-3.
(A)If the acquisition value is less than $50,000, the basic provision applies.
(B)If the acquisition value is $50,000 or more but is less than $100,000, the provision with
its Alternate II applies.
(C)If the acquisition value is $100,000 or more but is less than $102,280, the provision with
its Alternate III applies.
(xxii)52.225-6, Trade Agreements Certificate. This provision applies to solicitations containing
the clause at 52.225-5.
(xxiii)52.225-20, Prohibition on Conducting Restricted Business Operations in Sudan-
Certification. This provision applies to all solicitations.
(xxiv)52.225-25, Prohibition on Contracting with Entities Engaging in Certain Activities or
Transactions Relating to Iran-Representation and Certifications. This provision applies to
all solicitations.
(xxv)52.226-2, Historically Black College or University and Minority Institution Representation.
This provision applies to solicitations for research, studies, supplies, or services of the type
normally acquired from higher educational institutions.
(2)The following representations or certifications are applicable as indicated by the Contracting
Officer:
[Contracting Officer check as appropriate.]
(i)52.204-17, Ownership or Control of Offeror.
(ii)52.204-20, Predecessor of Offeror.
(iii)52.222-18, Certification Regarding Knowledge of Child Labor for Listed End Products.
130
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(iv)52.222-48, Exemption from Application of the Service Contract Labor Standards to
Contracts for Maintenance, Calibration, or Repair of Certain Equipment- Certification.
(v)52.222-52, Exemption from Application of the Service Contract Labor Standards to
Contracts for Certain Services-Certification.
(vi)52.227-6, Royalty Information.
(A)Basic.
(B)Alternate I.
(vii)52.227-15, Representation of Limited Rights Data and Restricted Computer Software.
(d)The offeror has completed the annual representations and certifications electronically in SAM
website accessed through https://www.sam.gov. After reviewing the SAM information,
the offeror verifies by submission of the offer that the representations and certifications currently
posted electronically that apply to this solicitation as indicated in paragraph (c) of this provision
have been entered or updated within the last 12 months, are current, accurate, complete, and
applicable to this solicitation (including the business size standard applicable to the NAICS code
referenced for this solicitation), as of the date of this offer and are incorporated in this offer by
reference (see FAR 4.1201); except for the changes identified below [offeror to insert changes,
identifying change by clause number, title, date]. These amended representation(s) and/or
certification(s) are also incorporated in this offer and are current, accurate, and complete as of
the date of this offer.
FAR Clause # Title Date Change
Any changes provided by the offeror are applicable to this solicitation only, and do not result in
an update to the representations and certifications posted on SAM.
(End of provision)
131
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
SECTION L – INSTRUCTIONS, CONDITIONS, AND NOTICES TO BIDDERS
L. 1. INSTRUCTIONS TO OFFERORS
The Government plans to issue a single contract for the services described in this RFP.
SUBMISSION: The requirements are:
Volumes I -Technical
Volume II - Past Performance
-
Volume III - Price (in accordance with Attachment 3 – Pricing Sheet)
Volume IV - Small Business Subcontracting Plan
Questions regarding this solicitation must be submitted in the “Question and Answer Spreadsheet
- Attachment 4” provided with this solicitation via email to Jasmine
Lee(Lee.Jasmine.4@dol.gov), Rachael Vargas (Vargas.Rachael.N@dol.gov) and Shayla Battle
(Battle.Shayla.E@dol.gov) by Monday, July 21, 2025 at 5:00 PM Eastern Daylight Time
(EDT). Responses to questions submitted will be addressed in the Question and Answer
Spreadsheet and distributed to all contractors who submitted proposals.
Proposals submitted in response to this solicitation must be submitted via email to Jasmine Lee
(Lee.Jasmine.4@dol.gov), Rachael Vargas (Vargas.Rachael.N@dol.gov) and Shayla Battle
(Battle.Shayla.E@dol.gov) by the time and date specified in Box 8 of the SF-1449.
When submitting multiple files and attaching the files among multiple emails, please use the
same subject and indicate in the subject: Email #x of #y.
Example Email Subject: CONTRACTOR NAME – RFP insert solicitation number (Email 1
of 2)
A. Format: The submission shall be clearly indexed and logically assembled. Each volume
shall be appropriately numbered and clearly identified with the date and solicitation
number in the header and/or footer and shall begin at the top of each page. A Table of
Contents should be created using the Table of Contents feature in MS Word.
B. File Packaging: Proposals shall be submitted as outlined below and shall clearly identify
each volume by volume number, volume name, and date of submission.
C. Page Count: The page count is as follows:
132
Proposal Part
Volume I-Technical Approach
Volume II - Past Performance
Volume III - Price
Volume IV - Small Business
Subcontracting Plan
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Page Count
Excluding covers, title pages, executive summaries, charts
and table of contents, the text of the technical approach is
Not to Exceed (NTE) 30 pages.
The text of the Past Performance is Not to Exceed (NTE)
5 pages. This does not include the Submission of
documentation (Attachment 1)
In accordance with the pricing sheets (Attachments 3)
No Page Limitation
D. Content Requirements: All information shall be confined to the appropriate
volume. The contractor shall confine submissions to essential matters, sufficient to define
the proposal details, in a concise manner, to permit a complete and accurate evaluation.
Proprietary information shall be clearly marked.
VOLUME I-FACTOR I: TECHNICAL APPROACH
No pricing information is to be provided in the Technical Volume. The offeror shall provide a
technical narrative addressing the four subfactors below. The narrative should discuss its
understanding of the requirements of this acquisition and its approach to performing the work,
identify the key personnel it proposes to use to perform the contract, describe its experience,
discuss its transition-in plans and quality control plan. The technical narrative should address
these elements, as more fully discussed below.
There are four subfactors within Volume I-Factor I: Technical Approach (to include Experience),
Management Plan, Quality Control Plan, and Subcontracting Plan.
The Proposal shall:
Provide a detailed description of the technical requirements of the Tasks enumerated in
the PWS;
Demonstrate a thorough understanding of the Department's technical needs;
Provide sound strategies to accomplish the identified objective and tasks;
Include a discussion of the likely problems and identify possible solutions; and
Be written to demonstrate the contractor's ability to present complex technical material in
an accessible yet accurate manner.
The proposed approach shall demonstrate the contractor's ability to perform all work required at
the highest level of quality.
133


1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
SUBFACTOR 1 – EXPERIENCE
The contractor shall submit a summary of work experience of a similar nature, scope, complexity
and difficulty to that which will be performed under the prospective contract contemplated by this
solicitation.
SUBFACTOR 2 - MANAGEMENT PLAN
The contractor shall submit a proposed organizational structure (the number and types of
positions, including subcontractors); plans for hiring, training, and retaining staff; assigning
work; and monitoring performance.
SUBFACTOR 3 – QUALITY CONTROL PLAN
The contractor shall develop, maintain and comply with an effective quality control program to
ensure services are performed in accordance with this PWS. The contractor shall develop and
implement procedures to identify, prevent, and ensure non-recurrence of defective services. The
quality control program is the means by which the contractor assures that the work complies with
the requirement of the contract. The Quality Control Plan is to be delivered with the proposal.
After acceptance of the quality control plan, the contractor will receive the Contracting Officer's
acceptance in writing of any proposed changes.
VOLUME II: PAST PERFORMANCE
The Government will evaluate the quality of the Contractor's past performance deemed relevant
and recent to the requirements of this RFP. The Government will use information submitted by
both the contractor and any other sources of information available to assess past performance.
"Recent" is defined as: Work that has been performed within the last five (5) years from the
issue date of this RFP or are currently being performed.
"Relevant" is defined as: Present/past performance effort involved similar scope, magnitude of
effort, and complexities this effort requires.
NOTE: In the case of a contractor without a record of relevant past performance or for whom
information on past performance is not available or so sparse that no meaningful past performance
rating can be reasonably assigned, the offeror shall be determined to have unknown (or "neutral")
past performance.
The contractor shall provide past performance information for no more than three (3) of the most
relevant contracts performed for Federal agencies, state/local governments and/or commercial
customers within the last five (5) years from the issue date of this RFP or are currently being
performed. The contractor shall have their references completed and submit Attachment 1 – Past
Performance Questionnaire of this RFP along with their submission.
VOLUME III: PRICE
The Price Volume submitted in response to this solicitation shall include the contractor's best
pricing for all categories that the Government has listed in RFP Attachment 3 – Pricing Sheet.
-
134
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The contractor should provide pricing based on their own technical proposal, the Government's
specifications, and other contractual requirements. Pricing responses should conform to the
CLIN structure in the Standard Form 1449 and Attachment 3 of the solicitation.
Although the Government has provided the Excel document with formulas, it is the
responsibility of the Offerors to verify the accuracy of all totals. If you experience any technical
difficulties with the Excel document and need assistance, contact the Contract Specialist(s).
The Price Volume shall include detailed spreadsheet(s) and/or Table(s) (i.e. via MS Excel or
Word Doc) that identifies, rates, and other direct costs (ODCs).
Pricing information shall ONLY be addressed in the Price Volume, and under no circumstances
shall pricing information be included elsewhere in the proposal. The Contracting Officer may
request additional information if needed to verify compliance with this requirement.
VOLUME IV – SMAL BUSINESS SUBCONTRACTING PLAN (Does not apply to Small
Businesses)
The Office of Small Disadvantaged Business Utilization (OSDBU) and the Contracting Officer
will evaluate the Subcontracting Plan for acceptability or unacceptability. If deemed acceptable,
the Contracting Officer will approve the Plan.
For a subcontracting plan to be deemed acceptable, the offeror representing a large business shall
respond to all eleven (11) elements of FAR 52.219-19. In addition, the offeror representing a
large business shall demonstrate a commitment to small business subcontracting and its extent of
participation in compliance with the associated regulatory requirements. The offeror representing
a large business shall submit a plan, which will meet or exceed the percentage requirements
(goals) described in this section for small business, small disadvantaged business, woman-owned
small business, HUBZone small business, veteran-owned small business, and service-disabled
veteran-owned small businesses.
Offerors shall adhere to the format outlined in FAR 52.219-19 using the Small Business
Subcontracting Plan template in RFP Attachment 6.
The Department of Labor, Office of Small Disadvantaged Business Utilization (OSDBU) has
determined the minimum appropriate subcontracting goals for this acquisition, to be based on the
total subcontracting amount proposed by the offeror. The goals in the table below represent the
percentage per small business category out of the offeror's proposed overall subcontracting
amount. These goals are considered to be minimum allocations per category, and categories are
not mutually exclusive.
135
1605C5-25-R-00002
Abbreviations
SB
Table: Subcontracting Category Percentage Goals
Small Business Category
Small Business (all types)
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Category Goal
60%
Small Disadvantaged
SDB
11%
Business
Women-Owned Small
Business
WOSB
7%
HUBZone Small Business
HZSB
3%
Service-Disabled Veteran-
SDVOSB
5%
Owned Small Business
Veteran Owned Small
Business
VOSB
5%
Note: Subcontract dollars may be attributed to as many categories as are applicable. (Example:
WOSB & SDB also count as SB) The offeror representing a large business shall:
Propose goals that are equivalent to or greater than those recommended by OSDBU. Clearly
state the proposed goals and dollars for each small business category in the plan. Provide cage
codes for the primary bidder as well as all proposed small business subcontractors. In no case are
"zero" goals acceptable; failure to submit a plan that mees the percentage requirements (goals)
set forth by the Contracting Officer for all small business categories may render the proposal
non-responsive.
136
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
SECTION M – EVALUATION FACTORS FOR AWARD
ADDENDUM TO 52.212-2 EVALUATION – COMMERICAL ITEMS (JAN 1999)
Basis for Award
The Government will award a hybrid firm-fixed price/labor hour contract from this solicitation to
the responsible offeror whose offer conforming to the solicitation is most advantageous to the
Government based on the best overall proposal that is determined to be the most beneficial to the
government, with appropriate consideration given to the evaluation factors (Technical Approach,
Past Performance, Price). Technical Approach is significantly more important than Past
Performance; Past Performance is more important than Price. All non-price factors together are
significantly more important than Price.
Price will become significantly more important as non-price factors (Technical Approach and
Past Performance) approach equality. Offerors are cautioned that the award may not be made to
the lowest price/highest discount offer. The Government is more concerned with obtaining
superior technical features and higher rated past performers than with obtaining the lowest
overall price to the Government. However, the Government will not make an award at as
significantly higher overall price to the Government to achieve slightly superior technical
features.
To receive consideration for award, an overall rating of no less than "Acceptable” must be
achieved for Factor I, and its associated subfactors (Experience, Management Plan, Quality
Control Plan).
The Government intends to evaluate offers and award a contract without discussions with
offerors. Therefore, the offeror's initial offer should contain the offeror's best terms from a price
and technical standpoint. However, the Government reserves the right to conduct discussions if
later determined by the Contracting Officer to be necessary. The Government may reject any or
all offers if such action is in public interest; accept other than the lowest offer; and waive
informalities and minor irregularities in offers received.
Pursuant to FAR 15.306(c) the Contracting Officer may establish a competitive range comprised
of all of the most highly rated proposals, unless the range is further reduced for reasons of
efficiency. Pursuant to FAR 52.215-1(f) (4), the Contracting Officer may limit the number of
proposals in the competitive range to the number that will permit an efficient competitive range
among the most highly rated proposals.
2. TECHNICAL EVALUATION FACTORS
Each offeror's Technical Approach will be evaluated on the extent to which it reflects a full
understanding of the requirement and proposes appropriate resources.
Subfactors under Factor I- Technical Approach are listed in descending order of importance:
137
FACTOR 1 - TECHNICAL APPROACH
a. Experience
b. Management Plan
c. Quality Control Plan
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
FACTOR 1: TECHNICAL APPROACH
Contractors must describe how they intend to perform the services and deliver the items outlined
in the Performance Work Statement (PWS). DOL will evaluate the technical portion of each
proposal to determine that the contractor understands the requirement, the necessary personnel
for successful implementation, and sufficient resources to meet and complete all technical
requirements for performing and meeting DOL's requirements.
The Technical Approach Section must thoroughly describe in narrative form the solution
proposed and must demonstrate an understanding of all technical requirements of the solicitation.
The technical approach narrative must be sufficiently specific, detailed, and complete to clearly
and fully demonstrate that the proposed techniques and procedures will meet all of the
requirements of the PWS. DOL will evaluate the Technical Approach to determine the stated
approach's likelihood for successfully providing services associated with the major tasks stated
in the PWS. Contractors must provide all of the information called for in the "Instructions to
Offerors" in a manner that clearly demonstrates an understanding of DOL's requirements and
provides a high likelihood for success to be considered for award.
SUBFACTOR 1.A: EXPERIENCE
The contractor shall submit a summary of work experience of a similar nature, scope, complexity
and difficulty to that which will be performed under the prospective contract contemplated by
this solicitation. The Government will evaluate the adequacy of the response to ensure it
identifies experience in the below areas to the extent and nature that provides the government
with adequate assurance of successful performance:
a. Management of data collection and processing operations - Managing efforts
involving the collection and processing of sensitive or proprietary survey data to
meet the requirements of the PWS, preferably at multiple concurrent locations.
b. Training Training staff for collection and processing of survey data, preferably
survey data.
c. Staffing - Hiring and retaining staff for collection and processing data, preferably
survey data.
d. CATI collection - Use of CATI to enroll respondents and collect survey data
including validation checks.
e. Quality Control - Performing quality control for similar efforts.
f. Timeliness- Meeting recurring deadlines for multiple deliverables for data
collection efforts.
138
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
SUBFACTOR 1.B: MANAGEMENT PLAN
The Government will evaluate the contractor's proposed organizational structure (the number
and types of positions, including subcontractors); plans for hiring, training, and retaining staff;
assigning work; and monitoring performance, to the extent it shows the government an adequate
approach and understanding indicating they can complete the requirements of the PWS
effectively and efficiently.
SUBFACTOR 1.C: QUALITY CONTROL PLAN
The Government will evaluate the extent to which the contractor's plan is found to have an
adequate approach and understanding of a sound and realistic quality control strategy that can be
readily maintained and enforced over the life of the contract. Additionally, the Government will
evaluate the plan to the extent which the plan identifies potential problems and describes
problem solving techniques and corrective action methodologies that are adequate in their
approach and understanding as required to ensure PWS requirements will be met.
FACTOR 2: PAST PERFORMANCE
Past Performance is defined as a measure of how well the contractor has performed under
previous opportunities that are deemed recent and relevant. DOL's evaluation of past
performance will be an assessment based on information provided by the contractor and
information obtained independently by DOL from a variety of public and private sources
including the references provided in the proposal. The evaluation will consider:
a. Quality of Service - Compliance with contract requirements; customer satisfaction;
etc.
b. Contract Performance – Overall performance, ability to solve contract performance
problems, and understanding and responding to additional requirements.
c. Timeliness of Performance – Reliable; responsive to technical direction; adhered to
contract schedule; tasks completed/provided on-time; no history of significant
performance penalties.
d. Personnel Management / Subcontractors - Work force properly trained and given
proper direction to ensure that required tasks are successfully performed. Effective
and efficient management of quality subcontractors.
"Recent" is defined as: Work that has been performed within the last five (5) years from the
issue date of this RFP or are currently being performed.
"Relevant" is defined as: Present/past performance effort involved similar scope, magnitude of
effort, and complexities this effort requires.
139
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
PAST PERFORMANCE RECENCY & RELEVANCY
RECENCY
RELEVANT
NOT RELEVANT
DEFINITION
Work that has been performed within the last five (5)
years from the issue date of this RFP or are currently
being performed.
Present/past performance effort involved similar scope
and magnitude of effort and complexities this effort
requires.
Present/past performance effort involved little or none
of the scope and magnitude of effort and complexities
this effort requires.
DOL reserves the right to contact references as deemed necessary to evaluate the contractor's
record of past performance. DOL is not limited to the references listed by the contractor - DOL
reserves the right to contact any relevant references for past performance information using
public and private sources. It is the contractor's responsibility to make certain that the
information provided for reference checks is complete, accurate and current as of the month of
issuance of this solicitation. DOL does not guarantee, however, that all citations/references
provided will be contacted and/or used in performing this evaluation. Lack of past performance
will be treated neither favorably nor unfavorably.
NOTE: Contractors shall only include the information required above in the Past Performance
Section of their quote. DOL will not evaluate or consider other information or Past Performance
information in other Sections of the Technical portion of the quote.
The past performance factor will be evaluated using the following evaluation ratings:
Performance Confidence Assessment Ratings
Rating
High Confidence
Satisfactory
Confidence
Neutral/Unknown
Confidence
Description
Based on the Offeror's performance record, the government has
high confidence the Offeror will successfully perform the
required effort, without significant performance problems.
Based on the Offeror's performance record, the government has
satisfactory confidence the Offeror will successfully perform the
required effort. Any performance problems would be expected to
be resolved without significant attention by the Government.
No relevant performance record was found or is available and
therefore the offeror is not evaluated favorably or unfavorably on
past performance.
140
Little Confidence
No Confidence
FACTOR 3: PRICE
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Based on the Offeror's performance record, substantial doubt
exists that the Offeror will successfully perform the required
effort. The resolution of performance problems would be
expected to require significant attention by the Government.
Based on the Offeror's performance record, extreme doubt exists
that the Offeror will successfully perform the required effort.
The pricing volume will be evaluated, including all option periods, to ensure that the prices
proposed are fair and reasonable, using the techniques in FAR 15.404-1(b)(2). The Government
will review the Pricing submissions for completeness and accuracy. If a proposal is found to be
technically unacceptable, a price evaluation may not be performed. The Government may
determine that a response is unacceptable if pricing is not included for all categories or if the
option prices are significantly unbalanced. Evaluation of options shall not obligate the
Government to exercise the option(s).
The price proposal will be evaluated separately from the technical proposal. Offerors that submit
an Attachment 3 which is incomplete, missing required entries, or creates calculation errors in
the document may be excluded from consideration for award for failing to submit a complete and
acceptable proposal.
FACTOR 4: SMALL BUSINESS SUBCONTRACTING PLAN (Does not apply to small
businesses) (PASS/FAIL)
The Office of Small Disadvantaged Business Utilization (OSDBU) and the Contracting Officer
will evaluate the Subcontracting Plan for acceptability or unacceptability. If deemed acceptable,
the Contracting Officer will approve the Plan.
For a subcontracting plan to be deemed acceptable, the offeror representing a large business shall
respond to all eleven (11) elements of FAR 52.219-19. In addition, the offeror representing a
large business shall demonstrate a commitment to small business subcontracting and its extent of
participation in compliance with the associated regulatory requirements. The offeror representing
a large business shall submit a plan, which will meet or exceed the percentage requirements
(goals) described in this section for small business, small disadvantaged business, woman-owned
small business, HUBZone small business, veteran-owned small business, and service-disabled
veteran-owned small businesses.
Offerors shall adhere to the format outlined in FAR 52.219-19 using the Small Business
Subcontracting Plan template in RFP Attachment 6.
(END OF SECTION M)
141


Task
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Sub-task
Sub-task
Number
Project Management Performance
Measures
5.6.4
5.1. Address Refinement and Enrollment
5.1.1 Address Refinement
a) The government will provide quarterly enrollment panels, containing business establishments
that need to be enrolled into the CES survey over the next calendar quarter. A business
establishment consists of a single Unemployment Insurance (UI) number, which can contain one
or more business worksites with shared ownership in a single state. The government will cluster
UIs by Federal Employer Identification Number (EIN) and load the resulting cases into the
government CATI system. The contractor shall distribute cases to contractor staff using the
government CATI system. While the government provides enrollment panels on a quarterly
basis, the contractor may exercise their discretion in when and how they choose to assign cases
to interviewers. For more information, please see Technical Exhibit 8 - CES CATI System.
b) The government will provide case registry information that will usually contain the business
name, UI, EIN, North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code, and address.
Point of contact (POC) information, including name and telephone number, is sometimes
provided to the contractor.
The contractor shall verify and update case registry information, confirm that the business is still
operating, and call the establishment to identify a POC who will receive a physical or electronic
survey enrollment package. The contractor shall use the government CATI system telephone
auto dialer for all outgoing calls. No calls can be made from non-government-furnished
equipment. While working onsite, contractor staff must use government-designated
telecommunication methods and protocols unless otherwise approved by the government. The
contractor shall use workstation mode which connects the physical phone to the laptop in the
interactive voice response system unless directed otherwise by the government. The contractor
shall use session-initiated protocol station mode in the interactive voice response system while
teleworking unless directed otherwise by the government. The contractor shall enter the POC
information into the government CATI system. The contractor shall use the government CATI
system or DCC Manager-approved workarounds to print forms.
c) The government will provide electronic or physical enrollment materials as needed.
The contractor shall prepare physical enrollment packages as needed, including cover letter,
form, brochures, and pocket folder, for mailing by assembling materials and stuffing envelopes.
The contractor shall prevent confidentiality breaches by verifying that inserts for each envelope
are only for one POC.
24
24
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The government will provide pre-paid postage envelopes for all physical enrollment packages.
The contractor shall deliver completed enrollment packages to a designated onsite location for
mail pick-up.
5.1.2 Enrollment of New Sample
a) The contractor shall call the POC for the new enrollment case to verify physical address and
obtain an email address. The contractor shall send POC an enrollment package and verify
receipt. The contractor shall use the government CATI system telephone auto dialer for all
outgoing calls. The contractor shall solicit survey participation, which typically includes the
following steps:
•
Explain the CES survey
•
Detail the scope of the survey request
•
Answer respondent questions
Verify UI number
•
Update respondent contact information
•
•
Collect data for all CES data items that are available
Determine if data are consistent with quarterly UI records, and
Plan for future monthly collection
Survey enrollment typically requires multiple contacts to successfully convert a POC to a CES
respondent. The contractor shall make the necessary number of contacts to complete enrollment.
The contractor shall work to convert initial refusals to productive cases before marking initial
refusals as final refusals. The contractor shall identify another POC or transfer the case to a
different interviewer, if necessary, in order to convert an initial refusal into a productive case.
b) The contractor shall provide at least one bilingual (English/Spanish) staff member at each
DCC to enroll and collect data from Spanish speaking respondents. (Note: enrollment and
collection in Spanish is rare, far less than one percent of cases).
5.1.3 Refusal Conversion
The government will identify previous final refusal cases that should be re-attempted for
enrollment. Typically, the government will wait for at least one year after initial attempted
enrollment to provide these refusal cases to the contractor. The government will load these
refusal conversion cases into the government CATI system.
The contractor shall distribute refusal conversion cases to contractor staff using the government
CATI system. Interviewers should take the Refusal Aversion Training prior to engaging in
refusal conversion activities. The contractor shall attempt to obtain survey participation from the
cases selected for refusal conversion by following the steps for Address Refinement and
Enrollment.
25
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
5.1.4 Address Refinement and Enrollment Performance Measures
a) Quality Standards
The contractor shall attempt to enroll all new sample cases provided by the government within a
calendar quarter. The contractor must attempt to contact all of the approximately 70,000 cases
provided per year for enrollment (this number can vary by plus or minus 5% per year).
The contractor shall attempt to enroll all refusal conversion cases provided by the government
within a calendar quarter. The contractor is expected to contact the approximately 8,000 cases
that will be provided per year (this number can vary by plus or minus 20% per year).
b) Acceptable Quality Level (AQL)
Quarterly Panel Enrollment Response (excluding UI Number Enrollment Verification)
The following rates are calculated for each quarterly panel based on the number of months since
panel assignment at CES's first revision of estimates (CES 2nd Closing). The government will
calculate these rates at the aggregate level and for each individual DCC. The contractor shall
achieve an aggregate level that is equal to or greater than the rates listed in the chart below and
ensure that no DCC is more than five percentage points lower than any of the rates listed in the
chart below. For more information on the calculation of these rates, please see Technical Exhibit
7 CES Response Rate Calculation.
Collection, UI Number Enrollment Verification, and Refusal Conversion
The following rates are calculated for each quarterly panel based on the number of months since
panel assignment at CES 1st Closing. The government will calculate these rates at the aggregate
level and for each individual DCC. The expectation of the contractor is that the aggregate level is
equal to or greater than the rates listed in the chart below and that each DCC is no more than five
percentage points lower than any of the rates listed in the chart below. For more information on
the calculation of these rates, please see Technical Exhibit 7 - CES Response Rate Calculation.
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
Rate
month
month
month
month
month
Enrollment Response
40%
60%
75%
75%
75%
AE Hours & Earnings
Response
55%
55%
55%
PE Hours & Earnings
Response
45%
45%
45%
UI Enrollment
Verification
95%
Refusal Conversion
25%
25%
25%
c) Monitoring Method
26
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The contractor PM and supervisory team shall monitor address refinement, enrollment, and
refusal conversion activities by analyzing reports detailing performance metrics at the individual
and collective levels. The contractor is expected to remediate address refinement, enrollment,
and refusal conversion issues as they are identified to increase the likelihood that acceptable
quality levels are met.
The government will be monitoring performance concurrently and notify the contractor PM of
any potential issues they have identified.
At the monthly meeting between the contractor and the government, the prior month's address
refinement, enrollment, and refusal conversion attempts will be reviewed and discussed.
5.2 Multi-Modal Collection
The contractor shall collect monthly CES data primarily via CATI. The contractor shall collect
data at the earliest time available from each respondent. The contractor shall collect data
according to the CES production schedule with the goal of maximizing collection by CES 1st
Closing. The contractor shall collect data that were not available by CES 1st Closing as soon as
they become available, preferably before CES 2nd Closing.
The contractor shall be responsible for DCC-owned cases collected by Flex reporting by
resolving edit and screening errors, even when there are respondent notes, and calling the
respondent for parameter edits within the policy guidance of the data integrity document.
The contractor shall work with respondents during the initial phase of CATI collection period
with the goal of preparing the respondent for a successful transition to Flex Reporting. The
government can change the length of this initial CATI collection period at its discretion. The
contractor shall use this initial CATI collection to effectively train the respondent on providing
accurate and timely data in preparation for moving the respondent to web reporting. The
contractor shall work to minimize the number of respondents that remain on permanent CATI,
which should be reserved only for respondents that are unable or unwilling to submit data on the
government web collection tool.
The contractor shall ensure that respondent contact information remains up to date. If the
respondent is no longer available at the establishment, the contractor shall identify and enroll a
new respondent. The contractor shall verify the UI number(s) for each case at least annually. The
contractor shall notify the government if the establishment has been part of a merger, acquisition,
or experienced any other major structural change.
The contractor shall notify the government if a case needs to be transferred to another DCC and
assist with the transfer and re-assignment of the case. Transfers between DCCs are necessary
when either the contractor or the government identifies that a case being collected at one DCC
shares a common respondent with a case being collected at another DCC.
The government will provide updates, when applicable, to UI account information. These
changes typically consist of updates to the UI number, changes to the worksites within that UI
27
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
account, changes to NAICS industry code, or similar changes related to the structure or
classification of the UI account. When needed, the contractor shall confirm these updates with
the respondent and ensure that data reported match the updated UI account information.
5.2.1 CATI Collection
The government will provide a CATI system designed specifically for CES collection. The
contractor shall use the government CATI system telephone auto dialer for all outgoing calls. For
more information, please see Technical Exhibit 8 - CES CATI System.
The government will email monthly reminders to Flex respondents requesting the current
reference month's data. The government may at some point in the future send electronic
monthly reminders to CATI respondents.
The contractor shall call respondents that have agreed to participate in the CES survey to collect
all data items for the current month and any missing data for the previous two months. The
contractor shall enter data provided by the respondent into the government CATI system.
The contractor shall review and address edit and screening errors flagged by the government
CATI system. The contractor shall verify the data with the respondent and either correct it or
address it by entering an appropriate comment code and documentation in the notes section.
The contractor shall schedule with the respondent a date and time for collecting data for the
subsequent month and enter this date and time into the government CATI system. The contractor
shall attempt to schedule future collection so that data can be collected before the next month's
CES 1st Closing.
The government will provide a notes template used to record all pertinent information about all
contacts with respondents. The contractor shall enter notes in the government CATI system
based on this template.
During the initial period of CATI collection, the contractor shall prepare respondents for a
transition to reporting data via the government provided web collection tool. The contractor shall
collect and enter a valid email address into the government CATI system. The contractor shall
provide detailed information to the respondent on entering data on the BLS web collection tool.
The contractor shall collect data by permanent CATI from respondents who are unable or
unwilling to report by web. For these cases, the contractor shall document in the case notes why
the respondent will report by permanent CATI and not by web.
5.2.2 Web Collection
The government will provide and operate a web collection tool(s). The government will provide
all hardware, software and technical staff to support the web collection tool(s). The government
will develop updates, both major and minor, to the web collection tool(s). For more information,
please see Technical Exhibit 9– CES Web Collection Tool.
28
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The government will email or print and mail upon request replacement forms, including
instructions, to each web respondent annually. Note: these forms are used by web respondents as
reference and not used for actual data submission.
The government will send monthly email reminders to web respondents. The current schedule
for sending these emails is listed in the chart below. The government may alter this schedule in
the future, based on either internal or external research, with the goal of improving web response.
Sent to
Type of
Reminder
1st Closing
2nd Closing
Advance Notice
email
All web
respondents*
12th of the
Not sent
month or next
business day
Non-response
Nonrespondents*
prompt (NRP)
Last chance
Nonrespondents*
About 10 days
before 1st
closing
Morning of 1st
Closing
About 10
days before
2nd closing
Not sent
*Respondents can elect not to receive email prompts.
The contractor shall place Non-Response Prompt (NRP) telephone calls to web respondents who
did not submit data after receiving NRP emails. This should occur during the week leading up to
CES 1st Closing and the week leading up to CES 2nd Closing. If the contractor is not able to
speak with the respondent during the first call, the contractor shall place a follow-up call to the
respondent to remind him or her to report by web. If the contractor is unable to speak to the
respondent during a follow-up call, the contractor shall leave a voicemail reminder to report data.
If the respondent offers to provide data by telephone instead of by web, the contractor shall enter
these data into the government CATI system. The contractor shall use the government CATI
system telephone auto dialer for all outgoing calls. The government may alter this schedule in the
future, based on either internal/external research or program priorities, with the goal of
maximizing the total response rate and/or minimizing respondent burden.
The government will provide monthly delinquent quarterly panels, containing web cases that
have not provided data for two or more consecutive months. The government will identify these
cases and load them into the government CATI system.
The contractor shall distribute these delinquent cases to contractor staff.
The contractor shall call these delinquent respondents to resolve any issues that are preventing
successful web reporting. If the respondent is unable or unwilling to return to reporting data by
web, the contractor shall collect data by permanent CATI using the government CATI system.
5.2.3 Fax Collection
The contractor shall minimize the use of fax collection and shall use fax collection only to avert
a refusal. The government may, at its discretion, decide to discontinue fax collection during the
term of this contract.
29
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The contractor shall fax monthly reminders to fax respondents using the government CATI
system. The contractor shall distribute data received via fax to assigned contractor staff. The
contractor shall manually enter data into the government CATI system. The contractor shall
review, and address edit and screening errors flagged by the government CATI system. The
contractor shall verify the data with the respondent and either correct or address the data by
entering an appropriate comment code and documenting in the notes section.
5.2.4 Email collection
Due to the manual work required to collect data via email, the contractor shall only offer email
collection as an option to respondents to avert a refusal. The contractor shall follow all
established rules and guidelines on the use of email for data collection provided by the
government.
The government will email monthly reminders to email respondents.
The contractor shall manually enter data into the government CATI system from emails received.
The contractor shall review, and address edit and screening errors flagged by the government
CATI system. The contractor shall verify the data with the respondent and either correct or
address the data by entering an appropriate comment code and documenting in the notes section.
5.2.5 Collection Performance Measures
a) Quality Standards
The contractor shall attempt to collect data for all cases before CES 1st Closing. The contractor
shall attempt to collect data for all cases that did not provide data by CES 1st Closing before
CES 2nd Closing.
The contractor shall attempt collection on all DCC owned cases provided by the government.
The contractor is expected to contact the approximately 80,000 DCC cases provided monthly for
CATI or Flex collection.
The contractor shall contact all NRP telephone cases provided by the government. This includes
approximately 15,000 cases monthly during the week leading up to CES 1st Closing and 2,000
cases monthly during the week leading up to CES 2nd Closing (these numbers can vary plus or
minus 20%).
The contractor shall attempt collection on all delinquent cases provided by the government. The
contractor is expected to contact the approximately 5,000 per year (this number can vary plus or
minus 20%).
b) Acceptable Quality Level (AQL)
The following rates are calculated based on the CES closing schedule. The government will
calculate these rates at the aggregate level and for each individual DCC. The contractor shall
achieve an aggregate level that is equal to or greater than the rates listed in the chart below and
30
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
ensure that no DCC is more than five percentage points lower than any of the rates listed in the
chart below. For more information on the calculation of these rates, please see Technical Exhibit
7- CES Response Rate Calculation.
Rate
DCC Collection
1st
2nd
Closing
Closing
85%
92%
Total Response (DCC and web)
64%
72%
DCC Collection - AE Hours &
50%
Earnings
DCC Collection - PE Hours &
40%
Earnings
Web/TDE Nonresponse Prompting
100%
100%
The following rates are calculated based on the number of months since assignment. For more
information on the calculation of these rates, please see Technical Exhibit 7- CES Response
Rate Calculation.
2nd
Rate
UI Re-verification
Delinquent conversion
month
95%
3rd
month
4th
month
5th
6th
month
month
65%
65%
65%
c) Monitoring Method
The contractor PM and supervisory team shall monitor collection activities throughout the
collection window by analyzing reports detailing performance metrics at the individual and
collective levels. The contractor is expected to remediate collection issues as they are identified
during the collection period to increase the likelihood that acceptable quality levels are met.
The government will be monitoring performance concurrently and notifying the contractor PM
of any potential issues they have identified.
At the monthly meeting between the contractor and the government, the prior month's collection
activities will be reviewed and discussed.
5.3 Help Desk
5.3.1 Web Respondent Support
The contractor shall provide coverage for incoming telephone calls from 7:30 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
ET on all government workdays (business days excluding federal holidays).
The government will provide initial training on handling help desk inquiries.
The contractor shall provide subsequent training.
31
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The contractor shall answer incoming telephone calls from web respondents and manually enter
any data received into government-provided software.
The contractor shall be prepared to handle questions about how to report data and what type of
data will need to be reported. The contractor shall forward any technical or otherwise complex
questions to the government. The contractor shall process approximately 350 incoming calls per
month.
The contractor shall, in support of web data collection, reply to respondent emails in the
CESMAIL email account. The contractor shall process approximately 200-300 emails per
month.
5.3.2 Web Edit Reconciliation and Data Quality
The government will provide a list each day of reports whose microdata failed edit & screening
tests for All Employee, Payroll, and/or Hours. The contractor shall call web respondents whose
microdata failed these edit & screening tests for All Employee, Payroll, and/or Hours. The
contractor shall obtain corrected data when possible or assign explanatory comment codes and
enter these data into government-provided software. This process is referred to as Edit
Reconciliation (ER). The contractor shall process approximately 200 cases per month.
The government will provide a daily sync report containing a list of reports with a response code
of 74. The contractor shall contact respondents via telephone or email to research web reports
with a response code of 74, which indicates that a worksite-level report, or 'child,' has responded
instead of the expected aggregate report, or 'parent.' The contractor shall ensure the respondent
is using the correct report ID and obtain data for the parent report when possible. The contractor
shall process response code 74 cases when available.
The government will provide a daily sync report containing a list of reports with multiple pay
systems. The contractor shall contact web respondents via telephone or email to research units
with multiple pay systems and ensure that these reports are categorized correctly and are
accurately reporting earnings data. The contractor shall process multi-pay cases when available.
CES program stakeholders within the government will generate On-Track tickets, which is an
internal system used to seek clarification of collected data. The contractor shall answer these On-
Track tickets for data collected by web. This will involve placing telephone calls to respondents
to verify data including but not limited to: address, employment level, UI number, and EIN. The
contractor shall process between 20-75 On-Track tickets per month.
The contractor shall create On-Track tickets for reports that have large differences in All
Employees data reported to the CES program versus the Quarterly Census of Employment and
Wages (QCEW) program. The collection entity (DCC, state government, web) responsible for a
particular report will resolve On-Track tickets for that report. In cases concerning web
respondents, the contractor shall contact the respondent to verify the All Employees data being
reported to CES.
32
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
5.3.3 Data Entry
The contractor shall manually enter data collected by the government via transcript (postal mail)
into government-provided software. The contractor shall process transcript reports when
available.
The contractor shall manually enter respondent data collected via fax at the BLS National Office
into government-provided software. The contractor shall process reports collected via fax when
available.
5.3.4 Other Help Desk Support Activities
The contractor shall resolve On-track tickets and reports whose microdata failed edit & screening
tests for All Employee, Payroll, and/or Hours for Flex respondents who reported via the web
collection tool, as determined by the government.
The contractor shall, in support of the CES program, assume responsibility for special projects
related, but not limited, to enrollment and delinquent and refusal conversion, as determined by
the government.
5.3.5 Help Desk Performance Measures
a) Quality Standards
The contractor shall provide courteous and professional service by telephone, email and
answering On-Track tickets.
The contractor shall enter microdata and registry information in a timely and accurate manner.
The contractor shall run reports and programs on schedule.
b) Acceptable Quality Level (AQL)
Timely (within one business day) and accurate entry of microdata and registry information.
Timely (between ½ a day and one business day depending on the request) and accurate
generation of requested reports.
A missed call rate of 3% or less of incoming calls per day.
95% of emails answered within two business days, multi-pay reports contacted within two
business days, and edit & screening failures contacted within five business days.
85% of On-Track tickets are closed within two weeks, 100% closed by two months.
100% of ER reports are called and 80% of ER reports are resolved prior to the CES 2nd Closing
for the report's reference month.
33


1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
c) Monitoring Method
The government will provide a monitoring system for the incoming and outgoing telephone
traffic of the Help Desk Call Center. The contractor shall generate daily exports from this
monitoring system for use by government staff.
The contractor PM and supervisory team shall monitor help desk activities by analyzing reports
detailing performance metrics at the individual and collective levels. The contractor is expected
to remediate help desk issues as they are identified to increase the likelihood that acceptable
quality levels are met.
The government will monitor performance concurrently and notifying the contractor PM of any
potential issues they have identified.
At the monthly meeting between the contractor and the government, the prior month's
performance will be reviewed and discussed. The government will also review performance
metrics and provide feedback to the contractor PM.
5.4 Training
The contractor shall provide all training, using government provided or government approved
training materials. All tasks must be completed in accordance with the training materials
provided by the government whether it is new employee training or other training.
The contractor shall certify new employees for the applicable new hire training modules before
the new employees can independently collect data for each module topic that is relevant to their
assigned work. The contractor and the government will establish a system to report completed
training to the DCC manager and COR that certifies a new contractor hire is capable of
independently collecting data that comply with CES procedures and data integrity guidelines.
New employees are not authorized to collect data unsupervised until they have completed the
data integrity training, signed the data integrity document, and completed the annual
confidentiality training. Data collection before training is completed may be done with approval
from the DCC manager.
The contractor shall conduct training of the trainers for the Collection, Non-Response Prompting,
Enrollment, and Address Refinement modules using government-provided training materials.
The trainers should have a firm grasp on the CES program and BLS tools and the ability to role-
play scenarios with students. The government may conduct training of the trainers for newly
created training material. Historically, these have included Refusal Aversion, Flex, and IVR
training. The contractor shall provide effective trainers. The government will conduct training for
contract staff who are training interviewers only when there are not any experienced contractor
staff to provide the training within 30 days of the start of the contract.
The contractor shall use the most recent version of training provided by the government. The
contractor shall consistently implement training in all CES DCCs unless conducting a
34
4
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
government approved pilot. The contractor shall provide the government with a training agenda
before each training session.
5.4.1 Collection Training
The contractor shall certify that new hires complete the Collection Module successfully and
complete fifteen data collection interviews under the observation of a contractor mentor to
receive their Collection Certification. The contractor shall not allow interviewers to
independently collect cases without this certification. The contractor shall ensure that this
training is completed within 30 calendar days of a new hire's starting date if the new hire will be
performing data collection duties.
5.4.2 Non-Response Prompting Training
The contractor shall certify that new hires complete the Non-Response Prompting module and
complete fifteen non-response cases under the observation of a contractor mentor to receive their
Non-Response Prompt (NRP) Certification. The contractor shall not allow interviewers to
independently contact NRPs without this certification. The contractor shall ensure that this
training is completed within 30 calendar days of a new hire's starting date if the new hire will be
performing NRP duties.
5.4.3 Address Refinement Training
The contractor shall certify that new hires complete the Address Refinement module. The
contractor shall not allow interviewers to independently perform Address Refinement without
this certification. The contractor shall ensure that this training is completed within 90 calendar
days of a new hire's starting date if the new hire will be performing Address Refinement duties.
5.4.4 Enrollment Training
The contractor shall certify that new hires complete the Enrollment Module successfully and
complete five scheduled enrollment interviews under the observation of a contractor mentor to
receive their Enrollment Certification. The contractor shall not allow interviewers to
independently enroll cases without this certification. The contractor shall ensure that this training
is completed within 90 calendar days of a new hire's starting date if the new hire will be
performing enrollment duties.
5.4.5 Annual Re-certification
All employees actively collecting data must take refresher trainings on all four modules
Collection, Non-Response Prompting, Address Refinement, and Enrollment Training on an
annual basis. The contractor shall provide annual re-certification documentation for all
employees to the COR.
5.4.6 Other Required Training
The contractor shall provide certification to the COR that all contractor staff have completed the
annual BLS Data Integrity training and Confidentiality training along with any additional
training BLS may require for all contractors.
35
1605C5-25-R-00002
5.4.7 Additional Training Materials and Supplies
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The contractor is not required to provide any additional subject matter training materials,
supplies or desk aids. The contractor shall obtain written government approval from the DCC
Manager and the COR prior to creating or using any additional training materials, supplies, or
desk aids. Any additional or supplemental materials that the contractor creates for training
purposes are owned by the government. The contractor shall not put its logo on any material that
has been created by the government for training purposes. The contractor shall not use the BLS
or DOL logo on any material not approved by the government.
5.4.8 Training Performance Measures
a) Quality Standards
The contractor will provide trainers who can successfully conduct training sessions to new and
existing interviewers using government-provided training materials.
The contractor shall ensure that all interviewers are certified for the address refinement,
enrollment, non-response prompting, and collection modules within the required time period.
The contractor shall ensure that all active interviewers are recertified in each module annually.
The contractor shall ensure that all contractor staff complete the BLS Data Integrity and
Confidentiality training along with any other training assigned by the government.
b) Acceptable Quality Level (AQL)
The contractor shall ensure that all interviewers complete the collection and non-response
prompting modules within 30 calendar days of their start date. The contractor shall ensure that all
interviewers complete the address refinement and enrollment modules within 90 calendar days of
their start date. The contractor shall ensure that all active interviewers are recertified in each of
the modules annually.
c) Monitoring Method
The contractor shall report all certification completion dates to the DCC Manager and the COR.
The COR will maintain a database (currently a SharePoint list) containing all certification
completion dates. The COR will also rely on DOL learning management system (i.e.,
LearningLink) reports to identify contractors who have not completed BLS-required training.
The contractor shall provide certification to the COR that all contractor staff have completed the
annual BLS Data Integrity training and Confidentiality training along with any additional
training BLS may require for all contractors.
5.5 Quality Management
5.5.1 Government Quality Assurance
The government will perform Quality Assurance (QA) activities to ensure data collection
complies with CES procedures and to ensure data integrity. The government will ensure the
integrity of the data collected by confirming the interviewer contacted the respondent and by
36
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
verifying the accuracy of the data collected. The government will perform case reviews and re-
interviews. The government may monitor Interviewer telephone calls. The government will
verify data entry, data code utilization, collection comments entered, proper use of collection
procedures and systems, and employ additional QA activities as needed.
The government will use case reviews to review critical elements including:
•
Notes
•
UI number verification
Contact information
•
Data edits
•
Data item collection, and
• Other elements as needed
The government will use re-interviews to review critical elements including:
Data integrity
UI number verification
Reporting location
•
•
•
•
Data accuracy
Pay period verification
• Data items collected, and
Other elements as needed
The government will share results of these QA activities with the contractor. The contractor shall
address these issues to the satisfaction of the government within five business days of
notification by the government; if this is not possible, the contractor shall provide the DCC
Manager a reasonable explanation.
The government will notify the contractor of concerns or issues identified by other methods. The
contractor shall address these issues to the satisfaction of the government within five business
days of notification by the government; if this is not possible, the contractor shall provide the
DCC Manager a reasonable explanation. The contractor shall resolve monthly actions items
provided by the government.
The Government shall establish a Quality Assurance Surveillance Plan that details acceptable
quality levels, along with monitoring timeframes, methods, and tools (such as specific Crystal
Reports and Dashboard modules) used for quality assurance activities.
5.5.2 Contractor Quality Control
The contractor shall provide the government with a Contractor Quality Control Plan that ensures
data complies with CES procedures and ensures data integrity utilizing the surveillance and
recording functions included in the telephone system software in addition to reports produced by
the contractor using BLS-provided business intelligence software. A final Quality Control Plan
must be provided within 90 days following the award.
37
37
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
The contractor shall ensure that all supervisory staff are capable of using the BLS-provided
business intelligence software (currently SAP Crystal Reports version 2020) to design queries to
the CATI system Oracle database. All supervisors should be able to translate their questions
about data into Crystal Reports queries to assist them in monitoring performance. Supervisors
should also be trained on how to use DCC dashboards to effectively monitor interviewer
performance along with their Crystal Reports query results. Supervisory staff shall utilize these
reports and dashboards to monitor staff and center performance.
The contractor shall actively engage in call monitoring to identify training needs, ensure data
integrity policy compliance, correct deficiencies in interviewer performance, and identify
successful techniques to share across centers. The contractor shall investigate and resolve the
following issues, but not limited to:
a) The contractor shall investigate if the CES All Employees (AE) is not similar to the QCEW
Employee Database (EDB) AE. The contractor shall review the CES AE and EDB AE and
determine if there is an error. The contractor shall correct errors and notify the government
within five business days of any issues that the government needs to resolve.
b) The contractor shall investigate if the UI number has not been verified by the interviewer. The
contractor shall verify the UI number if possible. If the respondent refuses or is unable to verify
the UI number, the contractor shall verify the EIN with the respondent according to government
provided guidelines. If the UI number cannot be verified, the contractor shall provide an
explanation in the case notes in the government CATI system.
c) The contractor shall verify that cases have moved to Flex collection or permanent CATI after
the initial CATI collection period. The contractor shall verify that cases that are in permanent
CATI mode have sufficient justification for not being moved to Flex collection. Please refer to
5.2.1 regarding transitioning CATI respondents to Flex collection.
d) The contractor shall ensure that UI numbers are properly aggregated. The contractor shall
correct the aggregation or notify the government if unable to make the correction when the UI
numbers are not properly aggregated.
e) The contractor shall perform re-interviews on cases where data falsification is suspected.
During re-interviews, if the respondent confirms that they did not talk to an interviewer on the
day indicated or the respondent confirms that they did not report the data shown in the
government CATI system, the contractor shall notify the government DCC Manager and COR of
a potential falsification of data within one business day.
The contractor shall immediately begin an investigation, including a case review of the
interviewer's completed assignment.
The contractor shall report to the DCC Manager, Government Task Monitor (GTM), CO, and
COR any contractor staff who has been confirmed as falsifying data within one business day. If a
38
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
final determination of falsification is made by the contractor or government, the contractor shall
provide a report to the government within 30 days that includes the following information:
•
•
Name of staff and length of time on contract.
Cause of initial suspicion of falsification, including the date of initial suspicion, method
for identification, case numbers involved, and whether initial suspicion was from the
contractor or the government.
Details on the complete (100%) review of staff's caseload, including the number of cases
reviewed, method of review, case numbers identified as falsified, current status of
falsified cases, estimate on the duration of falsification, and details on how the data were
falsified (i.e., entered as unchanged, random data entry, other).
• Staffing resolution (i.e., termination, resignation, etc.), including method of surveillance
after the time of initial suspicion.
The contractor shall document the cases in which falsification occurred, correct the data
in the government CATI system, and provide these results to the government DCC
Manager throughout the investigation.
• The contractor shall evaluate the circumstances and consult with the DCC Manager, CO,
and COR. The CO will determine whether or not the interviewer should be removed from
data collection activities.
Should the DCC Manager or COR disagree with the staffing resolution suggested by the
contractor, the CO will determine whether or not the interviewer should be removed from data
collection activities.
5.5.3 Quality Management Performance Measures
a) Quality Standards
The contractor shall satisfactorily address issues identified by the government. The contractor
shall provide and adhere to a Quality Control Plan to ensure the integrity of collected data. The
contractor shall reinterview respondents in cases where data falsification is suspected and
conduct investigations when warranted.
b) Acceptable Quality Level (AQL)
The contractor shall satisfactorily address issues identified by the government within five
business days. A draft Quality Control Plan must be provided with the proposal. A finalized
Quality Control Plan must be delivered within 90 days of contract award. The contractor shall
adhere to all activities and metrics defined in the Quality Control Plan. The contractor shall
notify the government of suspected data falsification immediately and provide a full
investigation report within 30 days when data falsification is confirmed.
c) Monitoring Method
The government will be performing quality assurance activities including but not limited to those
described in section 5.5.1. The contractor will perform quality control activities according to the
39
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Quality Control Plan. The government will notify the Project Manager and Task Manager of
quality assurance concerns. The contractor will notify the DCC Manager and COR of quality
control issues. The contractor will notify the government of potential data falsification within
one business day.
5.6 Project Management
5.6.1 Phase-In of Work
The contractor shall establish and implement plans for an orderly phase-in of operations at the
start of this contract. The contractor's phase-in procedures shall not disrupt or adversely affect
the day-to-day conduct of government business. The contractor plan shall, at a minimum, address
the following issues:
Inventory of government-furnished property,
Data and information transfer of government-furnished information,
•
•
•
•
Any other actions required to ensure continuity of operations.
Development of strategies to ensure the requirements are met successfully, and
During the phase-in period, the contractor shall become familiar with performance requirements
in order to commence fully successful performance of services on the contract start date.
The phase-in period shall be approximately 45 calendar days and a separately priced firm-fixed-
price line item. The finalized plan shall be due to the Contracting Officer's Representative no
later than 10 calendar days following the kick-off meeting.
5.6.2 Program Support Activities
The contractor shall provide the program support activities to plan, distribute, monitor, and
control work assignments issued under this PWS to ensure that all work assignments are
completed in a timely, cost effective, and highly competent manner.
The government provides business intelligence software licenses (currently SAP Crystal
Reports) to contractor supervisors to facilitate performance evaluation. Proficiency in designing
and running queries and interpreting the results are fundamental for the successful management
of contractor performance. The contractor shall not install third-party or proprietary software
onto government servers. The contractor's supervisory staff is expected to be proficient in using
the government-provided business intelligence software proactively to ensure that acceptable
quality levels are being met and to identify actions that will improve interviewer performance.
Additionally, the contractor PM and supervisory staff are expected to become proficient in
creating and analyzing the CATI tool's reports, such as Crystal Reports, and in other BLS-
created performance dashboards to inform their decision-making.
a) Personnel
The contractor shall designate a Project Manager who will be the contractor's authorized liaison
with the Task Monitor, COR, and government management personnel, within three calendar
days of award. The Project Manager shall be available to meet or confer with government
40
40
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
personnel as needed. The Project Manager is responsible for the timely delivery of all contract
deliverables. The Project Manager is designated as Key Personnel.
The Contractor shall attend an in-person kickoff meeting to review and finalize phase-in plans,
quality control plans, security procedures, and any other contractual matters.
For labor hours other than fixed price tasks (in accordance with FAR 52.212-4 Alt 1), the
contractor shall be required to document actual employee hours worked by use of a time sheet,
time clock, or other time keeping method. The contractor shall only bill for actual hours worked.
The contractor shall ensure that actual employee hours worked are documented on time sheets or
time clocks, which correspond with employee hours billed on monthly invoices prior to
submission to the government. The contractor shall provide this documentation monthly in
Microsoft Excel spreadsheets.
The contractor shall use automated government contract and personnel management applications
as required by the COR. The contractor PM's primary focus should be on performance and
ensuring AQLs are met; administrative tasks shall be delegated to appropriate contractor
administrative staff. These include, but are not restricted to:
Up Start
The contractor administrative staff shall provide completed, encrypted OF-306 forms and
any additionally required information for all contractor job candidates to BLS staff
designated by the COR. These will be submitted via upstarts, a clearance utility managed by
DOL's Department of Personnel Suitability and Security (DPSS).
BLS Employee Database
The contractor administrative staff shall request that the COR enter all employees into the
BLS Employee Database once they have been cleared to enter on duty by DPSS and given a
start date by the DCC Manager. A network account will not be created for the employee
until the employee information is entered into the database. The BLS Employee Database is
used by several BLS applications, including an application to process security investigations
and an application to process IT security requirements. The contractor shall keep the
employee information current, notifying the COR of any changes in contractor staff's
names, labor categories, and work locations.
Contractor Timesheet System (CTS)
All contractor staff shall use the BLS Contractor Timesheet System and make entries in the
application at the start and end of each workday. Additionally, the contractor administrative
staff should submit a Microsoft Excel version of timesheets to the DCC Managers and COR
on a weekly basis.
Invoices
An email copy of the invoice and supporting materials should be submitted to the COR for
review prior to submittal to the government's IPP payment system.
41
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
b) Reporting
The contractor's Task Managers shall convene regularly with the government's DCC Managers
to address DCC operations.
The contractor PM shall meet virtually with the DCC Managers as a group on a monthly basis to
discuss DCC operations and strategies.
The contractor shall issue a report once per month containing the following information in a
format agreed to by the government following award. The reporting period must be from the first
day after last month's CES 1st Closing through the reference month's CES 1st Closing. The
contractor shall provide this monthly report within 7 calendar days of CES 1st Closing.
•
•
•
•
•
The contractor shall list all the AQLs and the rates achieved by the contractor in the
reference month.
The contractor shall list all quality control metrics in the quality control plan and the rates
achieved by the contractor in the reference month.
The contractor shall provide a summary of work being done to meet or exceed all AQLs.
The contractor shall address reasons for not meeting AQLs, if applicable, and define
proactive strategies to remedy the situation.
The contractor shall provide monthly quality control reports listing any issues and
resolutions.
If applicable, the contractor shall provide a brief description of any technical or
administrative problems that have arisen during the reporting period, or any problems
that are expected to arise during the next reporting period. The contractor shall also
include a statement of changes in personnel during the reporting period.
The contractor shall include the current billing period expenditures and hours in usage of
dollars and hours, cumulative expenditures and hours, and balance of contractual funds
and hours as of the end of the reporting period. The contractor shall generate this report
by labor category.
The contractor shall include the number of staff at each DCC, the number of vacancies at
each DCC and the number of planned hires at each DCC in the monthly report.
Eight weeks prior to the end of any performance period, the contractor shall provide to the COR
a report projecting the amount of labor hour funds required until the end of the performance
period.
5.6.3 Phase-Out of Work
The contractor shall establish and implement plans for an orderly phase-out of operations at the
completion of this contract. The contractor's phase-out procedures shall not disrupt or adversely
42
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
affect the day-to-day conduct of government business. The plan shall at a minimum address the
following issues:
•
•
Removal of contractor property, and
Data and information transfer, and
Clean-up of contractor work areas, and
Any other actions required to ensure continuity of operations.
During the phase out period the contractor shall provide assistance to the new contractor. The
contractor shall submit the draft plan to the COR for approval no later than 90 calendar days
prior to contract completion. The COR will provide any revisions required within 10 calendar
days. The contractor shall submit to the COR the final plan with all revisions no later than 30
calendar days prior to contract completion. The contractor shall not make any further changes
without COR approval after acceptance of the final plan.
5.6.4 Project Management Performance Measures
a) Quality Standards
The contractor shall ensure that the AQLs are being met or exceeded; and is responsible for
developing plans to improve performance when AQLs are not met. The contractor shall provide
all contract deliverables with minimal errors within deadlines. The contractor shall provide a
Phase-In plan. The contractor shall convene regularly with DCC Managers and the COR. The
contractor shall provide monthly performance reports. The contractor shall provide a Phase-Out
plan.
b) Acceptable Quality Level (AQL)
The contractor shall provide a Phase-In plan within 10 calendar days of the kick-off meeting.
The contractor Task Managers shall convene regularly with DCC Managers to address
operations. The contractor shall meet monthly with COR and government program office staff to
discuss performance. The contractor shall provide monthly performance reports within seven
calendar days of CES 1st Closing. The contractor shall provide a draft Phase-Out plan within 90
days of contract completion and a finalized Phase-Out plan no later than 30 calendar days prior
to contract completion.
c) Monitoring Method
The government will review Phase-In and Phase-Out plans when they are delivered. The
government will schedule monthly performance meetings with the contractor to discuss
performance. The government will review the monthly performance reports provided by the
contractor.
43


1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
5.7 Personnel Qualifications and Duties
The contractor shall provide the necessary personnel with at least the minimum qualifications to
perform each task assignment in accordance with PWS.
5.7.1 Project Manager
a) Minimum Qualifications
• Bachelor's degree.
•
•
•
•
Five years of experience in the administration and management of large contracts
comprised of multiple and concurrent tasks. Management includes the planning,
budgeting, and staffing for each task.
Three years of experience in corporate on-site decision-making authority.
Two years of experience developing performance metrics which provide detailed
analyses of staffing, requirements matching, and hiring.
Experience defining specifications for reports to measure staff productivity and
interpreting data to address deficiencies and identify opportunities for improvement.
b) Duties
Typical duties shall include but are not limited to the following:
•
•
•
•
Corporate representative who can make commitments on behalf of the contracting
company in all administrative and technical matters related to the performance of tasks.
Responsible for the supervision and direction of all contract personnel assigned to the
contract.
Responsible for management of any subcontracting agreements, security enforcement,
and task reporting and coordination.
Evaluates reports on performance metrics and works with the COR and BLS management
to implement decisions to ensure proper execution of the contract to meet BLS needs.
Serves as the primary liaison between the contractor personnel and the COR.
•
Discusses technical, financial, and administrative issues with the COR, CO, Division
Chiefs, Task Monitors, and BLS technical leads.
Ensures that all BLS security and confidentiality requirements (See Attachment A) and
procedures are met for new hires and in place contract staff, including provision of signed
Agency Agreements and credentialing documents.
44
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
•
Supervises contract employees in assigned task areas.
5.7.2 Task Manager
Each DCC and the Help Desk shall have a Task Manager.
a) Minimum Qualifications
•
High School diploma or equivalent; or one year of relevant experience at the Task
Supervisor role.
• Proficiency in use of Microsoft Office or equivalent software.
•
Proficiency in creating and analyzing reports to monitor performance and assign
workloads.
b) Duties
•
Serves as the liaison between the contractor and the DCC manager regarding the
operations of the DCC.
Serves as the liaison between the Project Manager and all subordinate contractor staff.
• Supervises and assigns workloads to the task monitors and their respective teams.
• Supervises and directs quality control activities.
•
Directs and supervises training at the DCC level.
5.7.3 DCC Task Supervisors
Each DCC shall have task supervisors leading each team of interviewers. The Atlanta DCC shall
have six task supervisors; the Dallas DCC shall have four task supervisors; the Fort Walton
Beach DCC shall have six task supervisors; the Kansas City DCC shall have eight task
supervisors. These number of supervisors and distribution across centers may change at the
government's discretion.
a) Minimum Qualifications
•
High School diploma or equivalent; or one year of relevant experience at the Interviewer
3 role.
Proficiency in use of Microsoft Office or equivalent software.
45
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Proficiency in creating and analyzing reports to monitor performance and assign
workloads.
b) Duties
•
Supervises and monitors performance for teams of interviewers.
•
•
•
Ensures interviewers have completed the required training certifications prior to working
independently.
Performs quality control activities to ensure compliance with BLS requirements.
Tests new software and procedures related to supervisory and managerial tasks and
provides feedback to Task Manger.
• Serves as the liaison between interviewers and contractor management.
5.7.4 Interviewer 3
a) Minimum Qualifications
• High School diploma or equivalent; or two years of relevant experience.
• Two years of experience using Microsoft Office or equivalent software.
•
Experience using the internet for research.
b) Duties
Typical duties shall include but are not limited to the following:
•
All the duties assigned to Interviewer 2 positions in section 5.6.5.2, with consistent high
performance.
Focuses on refusal conversion and unresolved cases from other interviewers.
•
Focuses on delinquent cases, achieving above-average collection rates.
•
Mentors junior interviewers in correct procedures related to enrollment, collection and
edit reconciliation.
5.7.5 Interviewer 2
a) Minimum Qualifications
•
High School diploma or equivalent; or two years of relevant experience.
46
46
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
• Two years of experience using Microsoft Office or equivalent software.
Experience using the internet for research.
b) Duties
Typical duties shall include but are not limited to the following:
•
•
All the duties assigned to Interviewer 1 positions in section 5.6.6.2, with consistent high
performance.
Enrolls the largest, most difficult companies into the CES survey.
•
Processes confidential data records obtained through telephone interviews or other
approved means to achieve established performance levels.
•
Follows procedures related to rolling respondents to alternate collection methods after the
initial CATI collection period.
• Performs editing and reasonableness testing in accordance with established CES
standards.
Tests new software and procedures and provides feedback to supervisor and Task
Manager.
Answers incoming calls and emails from respondents by providing prompt and courteous
service.
• Researches questions received from CES stakeholders.
•
•
Serves as a training contractor mentor and observes Interviewer 1 staff during training
certification.
Reviews error messages, corrects data, and resolves early reporting, bad registry
information, and daily reports where applicable.
Performs edit reconciliation of self-reported data.
5.7.6 Interviewer 1
a) Minimum Qualifications
•
High School diploma or equivalent; or one year of relevant experience.
47
•
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Two years of experience using Microsoft Office suite or equivalent software.
•
Experience using the internet for research.
b) Duties
Typical duties shall include but are not limited to the following:
• Enrolls companies into the CES survey.
•
•
•
•
Processes confidential data records obtained through interviews or other approved means.
Performs edit and screening testing in accordance with established DCC Center
standards.
Follows procedures related to rolling respondents to alternate collection methods after the
initial CATI collection period.
Performs editing and reasonableness testing in accordance with established CES
standards.
Reviews error messages and corrects data where applicable, and as needed, redirect data
for error correction.
Answers incoming calls and emails from respondents by providing prompt and courteous
service.
•
Performs non-response prompting calls.
•
Performs edit reconciliation of self-reported data.
5.7.7 Administrative Support
To ensure that the PM focuses on operations and performance, administrative duties are expected
to be delegated to contractor administrative personnel. Examples of such administrative duties
include onboarding of contractor staff, separations of contractor staff, and invoicing.
48
PART 6-APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS
6.1 Publications Applicable to This PWS
Not Applicable
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
49
44
PART 7 TECHNICAL EXHIBIT INDEX
Technical Exhibit 1- Performance Requirements Summary
Technical Exhibit 2– Deliverables Schedule
Technical Exhibit 3- Estimated Labor Categories
Technical Exhibit 4- Glossaries
Technical Exhibit 5- CES Forms and Data Elements
Technical Exhibit 6– CES Enrollment Schedule
Technical Exhibit 7- CES Response Rate Calculation
Technical Exhibit 8- CES CATI System
Technical Exhibit 9– CES Web Collection Tool
50
50
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Technical Exhibit 1 - Performance Requirements Summary
Current Employment Statistics DCC Operations
Performance
Objective
and PWS
paragraph
Performance Standard
Acceptable Method of
Quality Inspection
Level
Enrollment Response, 2nd month
Enrollment Response, 3rd month
Enrollment Response, 4th month
40% Monthly
60% Monthly
75% Monthly
Enrollment Response, 5th month
Enrollment Response, 6th month
75% Monthly
75% Monthly
AE Hours & Earnings Response, 4th month
55% Monthly
AE Hours & Earnings Response, 5th month
55% Monthly
Enrollment
(5.1)
AE Hours & Earnings Response, 6th month
55% Monthly
PE Hours & Earnings Response, 4th month
PE Hours & Earnings Response, 5th month
PE Hours & Earnings Response, 6th month
45% Monthly
45% Monthly
45% Monthly
UI Enrollment Verification, 4th month
95% Monthly
Refusal Conversion, 4th month
Refusal Conversion, 5th month
Refusal Conversion 6th month
DCC Collection, 1st Closing
DCC Collection, 2nd Closing
25% Monthly
25% Monthly
25% Monthly
85% Monthly
92% Monthly
Total Response (DCC and Web), 1st closing
Total Response (DCC and Web), 2nd closing
DCC Collection - AE Hours & Earnings, 1st
closing
64% Monthly
72% Monthly
50% Monthly
Multi-Modal
DCC Collection - PE Hours & Earnings, 1st
closing
40% Monthly
Collection
(5.2)
Help Desk
(5.3)
Web Nonresponse Prompting, 1st closing
Web Nonresponse Prompting, 2nd closing
UI Re-verification, 2nd month
Delinquent conversion, 4th month
Delinquent conversion, 5th month
Delinquent conversion, 6th month
Timely and accurate microdata/registry entry
Timely and accurate generation of requested
reports
Missed call rate among incoming calls
Responses to emails within two business days
Multi-pay reports contacted within two business
days
Edit and Screening failures contacted within
business days
65% Monthly
65% Monthly
1 business Monthly
day
1 business Monthly
day
<3% Monthly
95% Monthly
95% Monthly
95% Monthly
100% Monthly
100% Monthly
95% Monthly
65% Monthly
51
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
On-Track tickets closed within two weeks of
85% Monthly
receipt
On-Track tickets closed within two months of
100% Monthly
receipt
Edit reconciliation cases called prior to 2nd
closing
100% Monthly
Edit reconciliation cases resolved prior to 2nd
80% Monthly
closing
Training
New hire Collection Module certification within
100% As needed
(5.4)
30 days of start date
New hire Non-Response Prompting Module
100% As needed
certification within 30 days of start date
New hire Enrollment Module certification within
100% As needed
90 days of start date
New hire Address Refinement Module
100% As needed
certification within 90 days of start date
Annual re-certification for each Module within
100% As needed
one calendar year of previous certification date
Completion of government-assigned training
100% As needed
within the deadlines
Quality
Management
(5.5)
Quality assurance issues identified by the
government resolved within five business days.
Quality Control activities completed as specified
in the Quality Control Plan
Notification of suspected data falsification to the
the Quality
Control Plan
100% As needed
Defined in Monthly
government within one business day.
Investigation reports for confirmed data
100% As needed
100% As needed
falsification provided to the government within
30 days of identification.
Project
Management
Timely delivery of accurate contract deliverables
(See Technical Exhibit 2)
100% Monthly
(5.6)
Contract AQLs being met or exceeded, plans for
improvement when AQLs are not met.
100% Monthly
52
52
Technical Exhibit 2 - Deliverables Schedule
Current Employment Statistics DCC Operations
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Number
Deliverable
Frequency
Medium/Format
Submit To
of Copies
Staff Management Quarterly
1
PDF or similar
COR
Plan
Contractor
Draft with proposal. Final copy
1
PDF or similar
COR
Quality Control
Plan
Phase-in Plan
due within 90 days of contract
award.
Draft with proposal. Final copy
due within 10 days of the kick-
off meeting.
1
PDF or similar
COR
Telework Plan
Draft with proposal. Final copy
1
PDF or similar
COR
due within 10 days of the kick-
off meeting. Updated as
needed.
Monthly Invoice
Monthly
1
PDF or similar
COR
Monthly report
Monthly within seven calendar
1
PDF or similar
COR
days of CES 1st Closing.
Performance
Period Funding
Phase-out Plan
completion. Final 30 days prior
to contract completion. The
COR will provide any
revisions required within 10
calendar days.
Eight weeks prior to the end of
1
PDF, Excel, or
COR
the performance period.
similar.
Draft 90 days prior to contract
1
PDF or similar
COR
53


1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Technical Exhibit 3 - Estimated Labor Categories
The labor categories below apply only to the labor hours portion of the Contract. Management,
supervision, and training are not included below and should be priced on a firm-fixed-price basis.
Item
Labor Category
Number
1
CES Interviewer 1 (Atlanta)
2
CES Interviewer 2 (Atlanta)
3
CES Interviewer 3 (Atlanta)
4
CES Interviewer 1 (Dallas)
5
CES Interviewer 2 (Dallas)
6
CES Interviewer 3 (Dallas)
7
8
9
10
11
CES Interviewer 1 (Fort Walton Beach)
CES Interviewer 2 (Fort Walton Beach)
CES Interviewer 3 (Fort Walton Beach)
CES Interviewer 1 (Kansas City)
CES Interviewer 2 (Kansas City)
12
CES Interviewer 3 (Kansas City)
13
14
15
CES Interviewer 1 (Suitland)
CES Interviewer 2 (Suitland)
CES Interviewer 3 (Suitland)
54
.....
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Technical Exhibit 4 - Glossary
Current Employment Statistics DCC Operations
Terms
Address Refinement
Advance notice email
AE
Aggregation
All employees (AE)
Auto dialer
Case
CATI
Certainty selection
CES
CES 1st Closing
CES 2nd Closing
CES 3rd Closing
Child report
Collection
Comment code
Definition
The process of confirming the address, identifying a POC and
preparing an enrollment package for an enrollment case.
An email sent to web respondents on the 12th of the month providing
a reminder to submit CES data as soon as it's available. The email
provides a link that will take the respondent directly into their report.
See All Employees.
Aggregation is a process by which establishments or units are
grouped together within their corresponding FIPS, UI, EIN, and
addresses. Aggregation rules are provided by BLS.
Employment data refer to persons on establishment payrolls who
worked or received pay for any part of the pay period that includes
the 12th day of the month.
A component of the Opacite system that allows cases to be called
from the computer. Because the auto dialer uses the telephone number
assigned to the case, it minimizes 'wrong number' calls and reduces
confidentiality breaches.
Either a single or multiple establishments that have been clustered
together to be reported by a single respondent. Sometimes referred to
as a "group."
Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing.
A UI that is selected with certainty because it is a government unit,
has a large amount of employment, or is collected by the EDI Center.
These units will remain in sample indefinitely.
CES is a monthly establishment employment survey of about 147,000
businesses and government agencies, representing approximately
634,000 individual worksites.
The last day that data can be received to be included in the first
preliminary estimate of CES data.
The last day that data can be received to be included in the first
revision of CES data, released one month after the first preliminary
estimate was released.
The last day that data can be received to be included in the final
revision of CES data, released two months after the first preliminary
estimate was released.
If a respondent can only provide data for an aggregated group of
worksites, these are the worksite level reports that are components of
that aggregated parent report.
Obtaining CES data on an ongoing monthly basis. This includes
collecting all available data items and, reviewing edit and screening
flags, and providing applicable comment codes as needed.
A two-digit code that explains data that failed edit and screening tests.
55
55
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Terms
Commissions (paid at
least once per month)
Confidentiality breach
Contracting Officer
(CO)
Contracting Officer's
Representative (COR)
Contractor
Contractor mentor
Data Collection Center
(DCC)
DCC
DCC Manager
Defective Service
Delinquent
Deliverable
EDB
EDI
Edit and screening
Edit errors
Definition
Commissions or bonuses that are paid at least once per month. If paid
less frequently, then should not be collected.
Any opportunity for, or actual instance of, an unauthorized individual
accessing sensitive information. Examples of breaches may include
mailing respondent surveys to an incorrect address, the loss or theft of
a computing device, email or fax transmittals of sensitive information
sent to an unintended recipient, or any unauthorized release.
A person with authority to enter into, administer, and or terminate
contracts, and make related determinations and findings on behalf of
the government. Note: The only individual who can change the terms
and conditions of a contract and legally bind the government.
An employee of the U.S. Government appointed by the contracting
officer to provide oversight of contract performance. Such
appointment shall be in writing and shall state the scope of authority
and limitations. This individual has authority to provide technical
direction to the Contractor as long as that direction is within the scope
of the contract, does not constitute a change, and has no funding
implications. This individual does NOT have authority to change the
terms and conditions of the contract.
A supplier or vendor awarded a contract to provide specific supplies
or services to the government. The term used in this contract refers to
the prime.
An assigned expert to observe and help junior staff with assigned
tasks. Used during the training certification process.
Four locations where CES enrollment and data collection are
performed.
See Data Collection Center.
The federal manager that oversees each DCC.
A service output that does not meet the standard of performance
associated with the Performance Work Statement.
A respondent that is two or more months behind in reporting data.
Anything that can be physically delivered and may include non-
manufactured things such as meeting minutes or reports.
Employee Database. Data provided by the Quarterly Census of
Employment and Wages, against which the CES benchmarks its data.
See Electronic Data Interchange.
Test for determining if data are: 1) logically possible and 2) within
expected ranges. CES runs edit and screening on data items for all
collection methods to identify potentially inaccurate data for follow-
up review.
When a record fails a data validity check performed by a data
collection instrument. An example would be having more non-
supervisory employees than total employees at a worksite. Edit errors
are resolved by government procedures.
56
56
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Terms
Definition
Edit Reconciliation (ER) The process of contacting a respondent to resolve edit and screening
EIN
Electronic Data
Interchange (EDI)
Email collection
Enrollment
Enrollment package
Enrollment panel
Equipment
FIPS
Flex Reporting
Government-Furnished
Property
Government Property
Government Task
Monitor (GTM)
failures.
Employer Identification Number. A nine-digit number issued to an
employer by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) Center in Chicago focuses on
collecting information from large multi establishment companies.
CES data collected by email. This is used only when other methods
will not work for a respondent. Email collection must follow BLS
guidelines to protect confidential data.
Soliciting a new survey unit to report CES data.
A mail-out, typically including a form, brochure(s) and pocket folder
sent to an enrollment case's POC at the end of Address Refinement.
The files that include a new set of cases to be enrolled.
A tangible item that is functionally complete for its intended purpose,
durable, nonexpendable, and needed for the performance of a
contract. Equipment is not intended for sale and does not ordinarily
lose its identity or become a component part of another article when
put into use. Equipment does not include material, real property,
special test equipment or special tooling.
A two-digit numeric code used to designate a state. For example,
Alabama is 01 and Illinois is 17.
Hybrid collection mode whereby BLS attempts to first collect
microdata via the web collection tool. If the respondent does not
report within by their typical reporting timeframe the DCC will
contact the respondent to collect the data via CATI.
Property in the possession of, or directly acquired by, the Government
and subsequently furnished to the contractor for performance of a
contract. Government-furnished property includes, but is not limited
to, spares and property furnished for repair, maintenance, overhaul, or
modification. Government-furnished property also includes
contractor-acquired property if the contractor-acquired property is a
deliverable under a cost contract when accepted by the Government
for continued use under the contract.
All property owned or leased by the Government. Government
property includes both Government-furnished property and
contractor-acquired property. Government property includes material,
equipment, special tooling, special test equipment, and real property.
Government property does not include intellectual property and
software.
To assist the COR, a Government Task Monitor (GTM) is assigned to
this contract. The GTM oversees the work performed under a specific
PWS in cooperation with the contractor PM to ensure that work
proceeds as described in the PWS. The GTM is not authorized to
direct any action that results in a change in the scope, price, terms, or
conditions of this contract.
57
57
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Terms
Help Desk
Hours
Key Personnel
Last chance
LDB
Loss of Government
Property
Microdata
NAICS
Non-Personal Services
Non-response prompt
(NRP)
Definition
Supports web and TDE respondents. Located in the BLS National
Office in Suitland, MD.
These are the hours worked or for which pay was received during the
pay period that includes the 12th of the month for all employees,
production, construction, and nonsupervisory employees. Included are
hours paid for holidays, for vacations, and for sick leave when pay is
received directly from the firm.
Contractor personnel that are evaluated in a source selection process
and that may be required to be used in the performance of a contract
by the Key Personnel listed in the PWS. When key personnel are used
as an evaluation factor in best value procurement, an offer can be
rejected if it does not have a firm commitment from the persons that
are listed in the proposal. The prime contractor is responsible for
performance of all subcontractors.
A reminder sent to a nonrespondent on the last day to report for a
CES closing.
Longitudinal Database. Data provided by the Quarterly Census of
Employment and Wages, against which the CES benchmarks its data.
Unintended, unforeseen or accidental loss, damage, or destruction of
Government property that reduces the Government's expected
economic benefits of the property. Loss of Government property does
not include occurrences such as purposeful destructive testing,
obsolescence, normal wear and tear, or manufacturing defects. Loss
of Government property includes, but is not limited to: (1) Items that
cannot be found after a reasonable search; (2) Theft; (3) Damage
resulting in unexpected harm to property requiring repair to restore
the item to usable condition; or (4) Destruction resulting from
incidents that render the item useless for its intended purpose or
beyond economical repair.
CES data items collected from respondents.
The North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) is the
standard used by Federal statistical agencies in classifying business
establishments for the purpose of collecting, analyzing, and
publishing statistical data related to the U.S. business economy.
https://www.census.gov/naics/
The personnel rendering the services are not subject, either by the
contract's terms or by the manner of its administration, to the
supervision and control usually prevailing in relationships between
the government and its employees. Non personal service contracts are
authorized by the government in accordance with FAR 37.012, under
general contracting authority, and do not require specific statutory
authorization.
A reminder to a respondent by telephone, fax, or email to provide
data.
58
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Terms
Notes
On-Track
Overtime Hours
(manufacturing only)
Panel
Parent report
Payroll
Permanent CATI
Physical Security
POC
Point of Contact (POC)
Probability selection
Definition
A place in the TopCATIWeb system to save notes that pertain to
interactions with a respondent.
An internal CES system for asking and responding to questions about
collected data.
These are hours worked by all employees, production and related
employees, and nonsupervisory employees in manufacturing for
which overtime premiums were paid because the hours were in excess
of the number of hours of either the straight-time workday or the
workweek during the pay period that included the 12th of the month.
Weekend and holiday hours are included only if overtime premiums
were paid. Hours for which only shift differential, hazard, incentive,
or other similar types of premiums were paid are excluded.
A group of cases sent to a DCC for enrollment or collection.
Examples: Enrollment panels, delinquent panels, refusal panels.
If a respondent can only provide data for an aggregated group of
worksites, they provide data on this type of report which will later be
prorated to the individual worksite reports using government
procedures.
Payroll refers to dollars paid for full- and part-time all employees,
production, construction, and nonsupervisory employees who
received pay for any part of the pay period that includes the 12th day
of the month. The payroll is reported before deductions of any kind,
such as those for old-age and unemployment insurance, group
insurance, withholding tax, bonds, or union dues; also included is pay
for overtime, tips, holidays, and vacation and for sick leave paid
directly by the firm. Excluded from the payroll are bonuses (unless
earned and paid regularly each pay period); other pay not earned in
the pay period reported (such as retroactive pay); and the value of free
rent, fuel, meals, or other payment in kind. Commissions are also
included if paid at least monthly.
Units that remain in CATI collection after the initial five months of
collection.
Actions that prevent the loss or damage of Government property.
See Point of Contact.
A contact at a CES sample unit, typically in the payroll department. A
POC will, hopefully, become a CES respondent.
A UI that is selected as part of a stratified simple random sample that
will be in sample for a period of 2-4 years.
59
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Terms
Production and
Nonsupervisory
Employees (PE)
Production Workers
(PW)
Property
Property Administrator
Property Records
PW
QA
QCEW
Definition
This category includes working supervisors and all nonsupervisory
employees (including group leaders and trainees) engaged in
fabricating, processing, assembling, inspecting, receiving, storing,
handling, packing, warehousing, shipping, trucking, hauling,
maintenance, repair, janitorial, guard services, product development,
auxiliary production for plant's own use (for example, power plant),
recordkeeping, and other services closely associated with the above
production operations.
This is previously used terminology, please see the current term
Production and Nonsupervisory Employees (PE).
All tangible property, both real and personal.
An authorized representative of the CO appointed in accordance with
agency procedures, responsible for administering the contract
requirements and obligations relating to Government property in the
possession of a contractor.
Records created and maintained by the contractor in support of its
stewardship responsibilities for the management of Government
property.
See Production Workers.
See Quality Assurance.
The BLS Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages program. For
more information, please see https://www.bls.gov/cew/home.htm.
Quality Assurance (QA) The government procedures to verify that services being performed
Quality Control
Refusal
Refusal conversion
Registry
Replacement forms
Report (number)
Report With
Respondent
Screening Errors
Subcontractor
TopCATIWeb
by the Contractor are performed according to acceptable standards.
All necessary measures taken by the Contractor to assure that the
quality of an end product or service shall meet contract requirements.
A respondent that refuses to provide data to CES. An initial refusal, or
soft refusal, is an establishment that is not providing data yet but we
believe might still provide data. A final refusal, or hard refusal, is a
firm refusal to provide data.
An attempt at re-enrolling a case that has previously refused.
Business and respondent contact and location information.
Updated forms sent to respondents after initial forms sent during
enrollment expire.
This is a 9-digit number that uniquely identifies CES units.
A CES report ID for which we expect to receive data. For an
aggregated unit, this is the parent report. For a single unit, it is the
report number.
The person that provides data for a CES report(s).
When a CES data collection tool flags a report for having data that
falls outside a set of parameters that measure other reports in the same
industry or previous data from the same report.
One that enters into a contract with a prime contractor. The
Government does not have privity of contract with the subcontractor.
The current web-based CES CATI system
60
60
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Terms
UI
Unemployment
Insurance (UI) account
Unemployment
Insurance (UI) number
Web collection
Web collection tool
Women Employees
(WE)
Definition
See Unemployment Insurance number.
UI account refers to a UI number.
The Unemployment Insurance (UI) number assigned to the employer
by the state. The ten-digit number is for the account where an
employer pays UI contributions.
A reporting method where the respondent enters data into the CES
web data collection tool.
The CES web page for collecting data directly from respondents.
All employees that are women.
61
Technical Exhibit 5 - CES Forms and Data Elements
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
An establishment is assigned one of six possible form types based on its NAICS code. These
forms are for the following major industry groups:
Mining and Logging
Construction
Manufacturing
Services
•
Education
Government
The CES survey attempts to collect the following data items from payrolls that include the 12th
of each month:
•
All Employees (AE)
Women Employees (WE)
Production and Nonsupervisory Employees (PE)
•
•
AE Payroll
•
AE Hours
AE Commissions (paid at least once per month)
•
AE Overtime Hours (manufacturing only)
•
PE Payroll
●
PE Hours
•
PE Commissions (paid at least once per month)
•
PE Overtime Hours (manufacturing only)
*The term "Production and Nonsupervisory Employees" was previously referred to as
"Production Workers (PW)," which still appears on forms and in several data collection
systems. These terms are synonymous. Further, Production Employees are referred to as
Construction Workers on construction forms and Faculty on education forms.
Below is a portion of the form used for collecting manufacturing establishments. All six forms
can be found on the CES Reports page on the BLS website.
62
2
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Report Number:
Name of Firm:
Each month report your payroll information for the pay period that includes the 12th of the month. For questions refer to page 2 for
the Column definitionsor.
Employees receive pay:
Column 1
Column 2
Column 3
Pay Group 1:
PAYROLL,
Column 4
COMMISSIONS,
Column 5
Column 6
Commissions Pay Group 1
EMPLOYEE
COUNT
WOMEN
EMPLOYEE
COUNT
EXCLUDING
PAID AT LEAST
COMMISSIONS
ONCE A MONTH
(Whole dollars)
(Whole dollars)
HOURS,
INCLUDING
OVERTIME
(Whole hours)
OVERTIME
HOURS
(Whole hours)
All
Pay period that includes Employees
$
$
January 12th 2023
Production
February 12th 2023
Employees
All
Employees
Production
Employees
N/A. Data not
collected.
$
$
$
$
N/A. Data not $
$
collected.
There are a few exceptions to the list of data items on each form. Only units receiving a form for
manufacturing are asked to provide All Employee Overtime Hours as well as Production
Employees Overtime Hours. Education units will only be asked to provide All Employee count,
Women Employees, and Production Employees (in this case faculty). Similarly, government
units will only provide All Employees and All Women Employees.
The chart below illustrates which data items are collected for each industry:
Form G:
Government
Data
Element
&
(NAICS 23)
Form A: Form B: Form C:
Mining Construction Manufacturing Services
(NAICS
Form E:
(NAICS 31,
Form S:
Education
(NAICS
Logging
32, 33)
22, 42,
61)
(NAICS
44-45,
11,21)
48-49,
Payroll
X
Frequency
Commission
X
Frequency
X
All
Employees
Count
All Women
Employees
All
Employees
Payroll
☑
X
☑ ☑
☑
☑
☑
51-56,
62, 71-
72, 81)
X
X
X
X
Χ
X
☑
☑
☑
☑
☑
☑
(NAICS 92)
☑
☑
63


1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Data
Element
Form A:
Mining
Form B:
Form C:
Construction Manufacturing Services
Form E:
Form S: Form G:
Education
Government
&
(NAICS 23)
(NAICS 31,
(NAICS
(NAICS
(NAICS 92)
Logging
32, 33)
22, 42,
61)
(NAICS
44-45,
11, 21)
48-49,
51-56,
62, 71-
72,81)
All
Employees
Commissions
X
X
X
☑
All
X
☑
Employee
Hours
All
Employee
Overtime
Hours
Production
X
☑
Employees
Production
X
X
Employees
Payroll
Production
X
☑
Employees
Commissions
Production
X
☑
Employees
Hours
Production
Employees
Overtime
Hours
X
X
☑
X
☑
☑
☑
☑
☑
☑
☑
☑
ठु
64
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Technical Exhibit 6 - CES Schedule
Enrollment Schedule
The annual sample is drawn in November and enrolled the following year on a quarterly basis.
The quarter in which sample units are enrolled depends on their NAICS code. The following
quarter is when sample units enter estimation (i.e., eligible for inclusion in CES data calculation).
For example, sample units enrolled in the first quarter enter estimation in April. However,
because two consecutive months of data are necessary for running calculations, March and April
data are needed for April estimation. An update to the sample is made prior to the fourth quarter
to add new UI accounts, known as UI births. These UI accounts are enrolled in Quarter 4,
regardless of industry classification.
Cases are paneled to the DCCs by industry based on the following schedule:
Quarter 1
Mining and
Logging
• Utilities
• Wholesale Trade
• Retail Trade
• Transportation
and
Warehousing
• Financial
Activities
Quarter 2
Construction
• Accommodation
& Food Services
• Arts,
Entertainment,
and Recreation
Quarter 3
• Professional and
Business
Services
• Information
• Other Services
Quarter 4
• Healthcare
• Education
• Manufacturing
• UI births from
sample update,
regardless of
industry
Collection Schedule
The reference period for CES data collection is the pay period that includes the 12th of each
month. BLS releases The Employment Situation news release three weeks after this week, often
on the first Friday of the next month. Along with preliminary estimates for the previous month,
The Employment Situation contains revised CES data from the two previous months. The last
day to collect data for inclusion in the preliminary estimates is typically 4 business days before
the news release; this is known as CES 1st Closing. The last day to collect data for the prior
month revision is known as CES 2nd Closing. Similarly, the last day to collect data for the
monthly estimation final revision deadline is known as CES 3rd Closing.
Based on the closing schedule, the number of collection days for CES 1st Closing for a given
month can range from 10-16 days. We define collection days as the number of business days
between the 12th of the month and CES 1st Closing. Additionally, CES includes a supplemental
collection day one business day after 1st closing. Business establishments will not have data
available until after their weekly, bi-weekly, semi-monthly, or monthly payroll period is
complete. The vast majority of collection takes place over the last two weeks of the month.
The government will determine the closing schedule annually and provide to the contractor
before the start of the year. The government, on very rare occasions, may need to modify the
closing schedule during the year.
65
55
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
As an example, the 2023 CES closing and news release schedule is included below:
2023 CES National Calendar
Current Employment Statistics:
The nation's employment barometer
U.S. Department of Labor
OF LABOR
BUREAU OF
U.S.
STATISTIC
Bureau of Labor Statistics
January
February
March
SU ΜΟ
TU WE TH FR SA
SU MO TU WE TH FR SA
SU MO TU WE TH FR SA
1
2
3 4 5 6 7
1
8
9
10 11 12 13
14
5
6 7
8
29
3
4
1 2 3 4
10 11
15
16
17 18 19 20 21
12
13
14
15
16 17 18
22 23
24 25 26 27 28
19
20 21
22
23 24
25
29 30
31
26 27 28
5 6 7 8 9 10 11
12 13 14 15 16 17 18
19 20 21 22 23 24 25
26 27 28 29 30 31
April
May
June
SU ΜΟ
TU WE TH FR SA
1
SU MO TU WE TH FR SA
1 2 3 4 5 6
SU MO TU
WE TH FR SA
1
2
3
4 5 6 7
8
7
8
9
10 11 12
13
4
5
6
7
8
29
3
10
9
10
11 12 13 14 15
14 15 16 17
16 17
18 19 20 21 22
21
72
18 19 20
11
12
13
14 15 16 17
22 23 24 25 26 27
18
19
20 21 22 23 24
23 24
25 26 27 28 29
28 29 30 31
25 26 27 28 29 30
30
July
August
September
SU
ΜΟ
TU WE TH FR SA
SU ΜΟ TU WE TH FR SA
SU MO TU
WE TH FR SA
1
1 2 3 4 5
1
2
2
3
4 5 6 7 8
6
7
8
00
9 10 11
12
9
10
11 12
13 14 15
16
17
23 24
18 19 20 21 22
25 26 27 28 29
13 14 15 16 17 18
20 21 22 23 24 25 26
27 28 29 30 31
19
222
3 4 5
10 11
17 18
24 25
6 7 8 9
12 13 14 15 16
19 20 21 22 23
26 27 28 29 30
30 31
October
November
December
SU ΜΟ
TU WE TH FR SA
SU MO TU WE TH FR SA
SU MO TU
WE TH FR SA
1
2
3 4 5 6 7
12 3 4
1
8
9
10 11 12 13 14
5
6 7
8
9 10 11
3
4 5
6 7 8
29
15 16
17 18 19 20 21
12 13 14
15
16 17 18
10
11 12 13 14 15 16
22 23
24 25 26 27 28
29 30 31
19 20 21
26 27 28
22
29
23 24 25
30
17 18 19 20 21 22 23
24/31 25 26 27 28 29 30
1st Closing (National)
2nd Closing (prior month)
National Release
State Release
3rd Closing (2 months prior)
Metro Release
State and Area Closing
If possible, please report your CES data by the highlighted date by calling 1-800-877-7715. For assistance, please call
1-800-827-2005. For published information visit www.bls.gov.
66
Technical Exhibit 7 - CES Response Rate Calculation
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Rate
Calculated by
Numerator
Denominator
Collection
Method
Enrollment response
Specific Enrollment
Panel
UIs with AE
collected
UIs excluding
out-of-business
DCC and
Web
and out-of-scope
UIS
AE Hours &
Specific Enrollment
ReportWiths that
Earnings Response
Panel
have AE, AE
ReportWiths that
have AE collected
DCC and
Web
Hours and AE
Earnings
collected
PE Hours & Earnings Specific Enrollment
ReportWiths that
Response
Panel
have PE, PE
ReportWiths that
have AE collected
DCC and
Web
Hours and PE
Earnings
collected
UI number
enrollment
verification
Refusal conversion
Specific Enrollment
Panel
Verified UI
UIs with AE
DCC and
Web
Specific Refusal
Conversion Panel
UIs with AE
collected
UIs excluding
out-of-business
DCC and
Web
and out-of-scope
UIS
DCC Collection
All in sample panels
Report Withs
with AE
collected.
ReportWiths,
DCC only
(includes
Flex)
Total Response
All in sample panels
UIs with AE
collection
DCC Collection - AE
Hours & Earnings
All in sample panels
DCC Collection - PE
Hours & Earnings
Report Withs that
have AE, AE
Hours and AE
Earnings
excluding out-of-
business, out-of-
scope and
refusals.
UIs in sample in
DCC or on web,
excluding out-of-
business and out-
of-scope
ReportWiths that
have AE collected
DCC and
Web
DCC only
(includes
Flex)
collected
All in sample panels
ReportWiths that
have PE, PE
Hours and PE
ReportWiths that
have AE collected
DCC only
(includes
Flex)
Earnings
collected
67
UI number re-
verification
Delinquent
Conversion
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
All in sample panels
Verified UI
UIs with AE
DCC only
(includes
Flex)
Delinquent Panel
Uls from a
Delinquent Panel
with AE
Total number of
DCC and
UIs from
Web
collected
Delinquent
Panels, excluding
out-of-business
and out-of-scope
68
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Technical Exhibit 8 - CES CATI System
The government CATI system, known as TopCATIWeb, was designed by BLS for use on the
CES survey. The screenshots below are from the current TopCATIWeb system. This browser-
based system allows users to assign cases, conduct address refinement and enrollment activities,
enter and edit data, enter case notes, and schedule appointments with respondents. The basic
functionality of the system is described below.
1. Assigning a Case
When cases are imported into TopCATIWeb for the Interviewers, they are initially assigned to
the case owner "UNALLOCATED." They must be assigned to individual Interviewers to
provide them with access to the case in the Assign Cases module. This module is limited to
supervisors and managers.
a) Select the user "UNALLOCATED" from the "From User" dropdown menu.
b) Click on the "Add Cases" button.
Assign Cases
Mode
ALL
RC ALL
Prev Owner
ALL
Filters
Clear
Alloc User
ALL
State
ALL
Beset
From User (Case Owner)
UNALLOCATED
All Cases
Add Cases
b
O Refusal Conversion Assignment
Regular Assignment
Empty Refusal Panel
Remove Cases
Select First > 0
Cases
Total Cases 0
Selected Cases 0
om Own... Prev Owne... Alloc User... RC... Mod... Test... UNIT... Pane... Company Na...
Refusal... Appointment Time
0-0 of 0 items « <
Note: Refusal Conversion Panel Numbers will only be assigned in refusal conversion assignment mode.
Unassign
Assign
Temp Assig
c) The list of cases that are assigned to UNALLOCATED will now be displayed.
69
60
Assign Cases
Mode
RC ALL ▾
ALL ▾
Prev Owner
ALL
Filters
> Clear
Alloc User
ALL
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
State
ALL ✓
Reset
Add Cases
From User (Case Owner)
UNALLOCATED
O Refusal Conversion Assignment
Regular Assignment
Empty Refusal Panel
Remove Cases
All Cases
Select First > 100
Cases
Total Cases
Selected Cases 0
100
#...
Case ID ...
From Own... P...
Alloc User ↑↓
RC... Mod... Test... UNIT... Pane... Company Na...
Refusal...
Appointment ↑↓ Ti
1
2
3
4
010006133 UNALLOCATED VAN UNALLOCATED
010344179
010344486
010344650
UNALLOCATED MCG UNALLOCATED
UNALLOCATED MCG UNALLOCATED
UNALLOCATED DOC UNALLOCATED
8888
P
P
P
P
Flex5 1
Flex5 1
Flex5 1
Flex5 1
21Q4
21Q3
21Q4 FIRM010344486
21Q3 FIRM010344650
FIRM010006133
FIRM010344179
Aug 25, 2023 10:10 AN US
Aug 23, 2023 8:40 AM US
Aug 18, 2023 3:20 PM US
Aug 25, 2023 9:50 AM US
d) To assign them, select the specific Interviewer from the “To User" dropdown menu.
e) Then click on the "Add User" button and the user will appear in the list below.
Assign Cases
Mode
ALL
RC ALL
Prev Owner
ALL
ters
Qear
Add Cases
From User (Case Owner)
UNALLOCATED
Bemove Cases
All Cases
Select First 100
Case ID. From Own... P....
Alloc User
Alloc User
ALL
Cases
State
ALL
Beset
Selected Users
O Refusal Conversion Assignment
Regular Assignment
Empty Refusal
Total Cases 100
Selected Cases 0
d
To User
DOONS
Add User
All Users
Remoye
Users)
ADD A
User
RC... Mod... Test... UNIT.. Pane... Company Na... Refusal... Appointment T
To User 11
Cases T
Units T
1
2
010006133 UNALLOCATED VAN UNALLOCATED
010344179 UNALLOCATE MCCUNALLOCATED
00
P
00
P
3
010344486 UNALLOCATED MCC UNALLOCATED
00 P
4
010344650 UNALLOCATED DOC UNALLOCATED
00 P
S
010345417 UNALLOCATED BRO UNALLOCATED
00 P
6
010348418 UNALLOCATED JOHE UNALLOCATED
00 P
7
020301304 UNALLOCATE DON UNALLOCATED
00
C
8 020309523 UNALLOCATED ALLE UNALLOCATED
00 P
9
020311159 UNALLOCATED BAU UNALLOCATED
00
10
020311293 UNALLOCATED DON UNALLOCATED
P
00 C
11
040050538 UNALLOCATE PUC UNALLOCATED
00 C
12 040096733 UNALLOCATED GRE, UNALLOCATED
00
C
Rex5 1
Flex5 1
Rex5 1
Flex5 1
Rex5 1
Flex5 1
RexS 1
Flex5 1
Flex5 1
Rex5 1
Flex5 5
Rex5 1
2104 FIRMO10006133
2103 FIRMO10344179
2104 FIRM010344486
2103 FIRM010344650
2102 FIRM010345417
2203 FIRM010348418
2302 FIRM020301304
020H FIRM020309523
2203 FIRM020311159
2203
FIRM020311293
2102 FIRM040050538
2203 FIRM040086733
Aug 25, 2023 10:10 AN U
Aug 23, 2023 8:40 AM U
Aug 18, 2023 3:20 PM U
DIXONS
Aug 25, 2023 9:50 AM U
Aug 18, 2023 10:10 AN U
Aug 21, 2023 10:40 AN U
Aug 21, 2023 12:50 PM U
Aug 28, 2023 1:50 PM U
Aug 17, 2023 1:30 PM U
Aug 18, 2023 1:20 PM U
Aug 16, 2023 8:10 AM U
Aue 23, 2023 11:20 AN
°
0
f) Next, select the case(s) to assign to highlight them and then select the specific To User. Click
on the "Assign" button at the bottom of the screen to assign the cases.
70
70
Assign Cases
Mode
RC ALL
Prev Owner
ALL
Alloc User
ALL
State
ALL
Beset
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Fibers
Lear
Agd Cases
From User (Case Owner)
UNALLOCATED
All Cases
O Refusal Conversion Assignment
Regular Assignment
Empty Refusal Panel
To User
DIXON S
All Users
Bemove Cases
Select First0
Cases
Total Cases 100
Selected Cases 10
Selected Users
Add Uhver
Remoye
Uberts)
Add A
Users
Case ID From
Alloc User 11
RC Mod... Test UNIT Pane. Company Na...
Refusal... Appointment T
To User 11
Cases 11
Units
010006133 UNALLOCATED VA UNALLOCATED
00
2
3
010344179 UNALLOCATED MUNALLOCATED
010344486 UNALLOCATED MUNALLOCATED
00
P
P
4
5
6
010344650 UNALLOCATE DC UNALLOCATED
010345417 UNALLOCATE BRUNALLOCATED
010348418 UNALLOCATED JOUNALLOCATED
00
00
00 P
P
00 P
P
7
020301304 UNALLOCATED DC UNALLOCATED
00 C
Rex5
1
Rex5 1
Flex5 1
Flex5 1
Flex5 1
Rex5 1
Flex5 1
B
020309523 UNALLOCATED AL UNALLOCATED
00
P
Rex5 1
9
020311159 UNALLOCATED BA UNALLOCATED
00
P
RexS 1
10
020311293 UNALLOCATE DC UNALLOCATED
00 C
Alex5 1
2104 FIRMO10006133
2103 FIRMO10344179
2104 FIRMO10344486
2103 FIRMO10344650
2102 FIRM010345417
2203 FIRM010348418
2302 FIRM020301304
020H FIRM020309523
2203 FIRM020311159
2203 FIRM020311293
11
040050538 UNALLOCATED PU UNALLOCATED
00
C
Rex5
S
12
040086733 UNALLOCATES GRUNALLOCATED
00
C
Rex5
1
2102 FIRM040050538
2203 FIRM040086733
Aug 25, 2023 10:10 AN
Aug 23, 2023 8:40 AM
Aug 18, 2023 3:20 PM
Aug 25, 2023 9:50 AM U
Aug 18, 2023 10:10 AN
Aug 21, 2023 10:40 AN U
Aug 21, 2023 12:50 PM U
Aug 28, 2023 1:50 PM
Aug 17, 2023 1:30 PM U
Aug 18, 2023 1:20 PM U
Aug
DOON S
Auz 2
10 AM U
11:20 AM L
1-100 of 100 items
1
Note: Refusal Conversion Panel Numbers will only be assigned in refusal conversion assignment mode
Unassig
Assign
Temp Assign
Revert Tego Assign Return to Case List
71
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
2. Address Refinement and Enrollment
When a case is received, it is in Address Refinement mode. Interviewers must refine the case by
contacting the company, confirming the case details and emailing the respondent a CES
Enrollment Package. Once this has been completed, the case can be moved to the Enrollment
mode by clicking on the "Complete Address Refinement” or “Complete Address Refinement and
Close" button.
Home ▼ Data
Utilities Admin
Tools ▼
DCC Transfers Help
Shortcut Key
Notes Dialer Scheduler Print/Fax Batch Fax Entry Iransfer Request a Save
Save And Close
Retu
Address/Enrollment
Contact
Johnny
Title
HR Manager
Company
Test Company
Address
250360117 Main St.
Fax
Test
Phone 1
Extension
(202)
691-6106
Phone 2
Extension
(202)
691-6106
Fax Status
City
Test City
State
CA Email
test@test.com
Zip Code
92010
6674 Type
Time Zone
U! Email Status
Verify Email (@)
Verified
9/28/2023
Complete Address Refinement
Complete Address Refinement and Close
Unit Grid
While in Enrollment mode, the Interviewer will attempt to enroll the respondent in the CES
survey. After the respondent agrees to participate, the Interviewer can complete Enrollment.
First, change the case's Disposition Code (DC) to 99 on the right side of the screen, indicating
the respondent will participate in the survey.
72
Unit-Level Info
CASE NUM
REPORT NUM
UI NUM
RUN
DC
250360117
250360117
1234567890
00000
00▾
Assign All Units
21
Refusal, non-mandatory survey
✓ Location Address
22
Refusal, no time
23
Refusal, confidentiality concern
Unit ID
Company
2503601 24
Refusal, company policy against survey
25
Refusal, no benefit to company
Sec Name
Test Con
Test
26
Refusal, government intruding
27
Refusal, too difficult
Location
Test Loc 28
Refusal, company too small
Address
2503601 29
Refusal, other reason
30
Refusal, multiple reasons
City
Zip Code
Test City
12345
State
NY
50
Out of business
51
Out of scope, not in US
52
Out of scope, business sold
QUI Data
53 Out of scope, employees leased
54 Out of scope, industry
NCE Industry: false
55 Cannot collect, multiple reasons
70 Duplicate uni
Month
AE
P
COMMENT
71
Cannot loca
Sep 2022
1
72 Cannot locate respondent
Aug 2022
1
99 Will Participate
Jul 2022
1
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Next, click on the "Complete Enrollment” or “Complete Enrollment and Close" button to move
the case to Collection mode.
Home ▼ Data ✓ Utilities ✓
Admin ✓ Tools ▾ DCC Transfers ✓ Help ▾
Shortcu
Notes Dialer
Scheduler Print/Fax Batch Fax Entry
Iransfer Request Save Save And Close
Address/Enrollment
Primary Contact
Secondary Contact
Contact
Johnny
Test
Title
HR Manager
Company
Test Company
Address
250360117 Main St.
Fax
Phone 1
✓ (202) 691-6106
Extension
Phone 2
▾ (202) 691-6106
Extension
Fax Status
0 ✓
City
Test City
State
NY Email
test@test.com
Zip Code
12345
1234 Type
Time Zone
U Email Status
Unknown/u
10/18/2023
Verify Email (@)
Complete Enrollment
Complete Enrollment and Close
73


1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
3. Emailing or Printing a Form
To email or print the form during Address Refinement or Enrollment, utilize the “Print/Fax"
button within the case.
Home ▼ Data
Utilities
Admin
Tools ▾
DCC Transfers
Help
Notes Dialer
Schedule Print/Fax Batch Fax Entry Iransfer Request a Save
Save And Close
Return to Case List
Address/Enrollment
CASE OWNER
DIXON S
Primary Contact
Secondary Contact
Contact
Andrew
PERVISOR
MODE
A
APPOINTMENT
Aug 30, 2023 12:00 PM
PANEL NR
2203
FORM TYPE
NRP
E
Dentist
Then select the package type, forms and/or letters to include, and delivery method and click the
"Send" button. This will either email the documents, send them to the printer, or fax them to the
respondent based on your selection.
Print/Fax
Documents
Package Type
Sel Name
Form Type
Enrollment
BLS 790 Survey Form
Enr Book Single
Start Month
Sep 2023
Delivery Method
O Print/Mail
L
Fax
Email
74
Print/Fax
Package Type
Enalment
Delivery Method
OPrintMal
BL
Ofan
<-mal
Case Selection
Documents
Sel Name
Cover Sheet
Form Type
Start Monch
BLS 790 Survey Form
Dr Book Single
Send Cover Only
Cover Sheet Text
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
determining the nation's monthly counts of loyment. The person whose name appears below will be the one who will be
selling. The focus of this all will be together information about your payall that in the 12th day of the
ones This Information will be used to deterelie the nation's Job count. During the call, we'll explain the importance
specific to your ess
The Data Collection Specialist assigned to your business: GERE
Force MutPay form for A/E case
Osend to secondary Contact
g Sel Case id
341383752
Contact Name L
Andrew Dentist
Sec Contact Name 11
Mode TL
A
Code
Sched Date
Aug 30 2023 12:00 PM
Units Job Status T Fax
Sec Fax # 11
Email Addr. 11
Sec Email Addr. Pret. Dell I
Found 1
gble t
Selected
"Send"
button
4. Data Entry
When data are collected from an establishment, the data will be entered on the Collection Screen.
The number of data item fields to be entered depends on the Form Type (industry) of the
company (see table in Appendix A). Data item fields not required for a specific form type are
grayed out in the collection grid.
An example of a Form E (Services establishments) collection grid is shown below. Form E
requires all data items except Overtime hours (OT).
Address/Enrollment
Collection
Contact
Title
Phone
Form
Cont
Abraham Lincoln
Payroll Manager
(202) 691-6106
E
IRM!
MM/ AE/
Collections
EMP
WW
PR
CM
Hour
от
YYYY PW
AE
09/2023 PW
75
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
5. Screening Errors
Occasionally, screening errors occur indicating that there are potential problems with the data
entered. The problematic data items are highlighted in blue in TopCATIWeb. There are many
reasons why the errors occur, including large over-the-month changes (OTM), parameter errors,
or changes that are too high or low. When errors occur, it is the responsibility of the Interviewer
to determine the cause of the errors and work with the respondent to correct them.
MMY AW EMP WW PR CM Hour OT CC1 CC2 PLP CLP RC ☐
AE 173
09/2023 PW
23
✓
2-B ▾ 0-L▾ 12 P▾
▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬
TopCATIWeb will also provide a brief explanation for the error.
Error Transcripts
I noticed that your number of All Employee count changed significantly from last month. What caused this
change? (>= 0.2319)
More Info
When data are input and trigger an error message, but the data are correct, the Interviewer can
assign a comment code to explain the error(s). The comment codes or CC1/CC2 are provided in
a drop-down list for the Interviewer to select from and are grouped by type including
Employment Shifts, Pay Shifts, Hours, Special Conditions, and Reporting Issues. The data below
show a large jump in employment from 73 in August 2023 to 173 in September. The comment
code 03 is used to justify this change. The Interviewer shall be responsible for providing notes in
the case regarding this error.
MM/
YYYY
PW EMP WW PR CM Hour OT CC1 CC2 PLP CLP RC
AE 173 23
03-▾
2-B▾ 0-L▾
90 S ->
09/2023
PW
08/2023 AE 73 11 ▬▬▬▬2-80-
PW
76
16
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Collection Details
Collection: Select 1 of 1 Unit(s)
Transcripts
How many non-supervisory workers worked or received pay during the pay
September 12th?
Selected Unit:
« 06 0596164 PRIMARY
MM/
YYYY
09/2023
08/2023
Location: LOCATIO
Collections
AW/ EMP WW PR CM Hour OT
- Employment Shifts
01 - Seasonal increase
02 - Seasonal decrease
03 - More business (expansion)
04-Less business (contraction)
05-Short term/specific business project starting or continuing
06-Short-term/specific business project ending or approaching
06-completion
07-Layoff
08-Strike, lockout or other labor dispute
61 - Employment returns to normal after strike
09 - Temporary shutdown of physical location
12- Internal reorganization, downsizing or bankruptcy resulting
12-in an employment decrease
14- Nonstandard work schedule
15 Intra-account (firm) transfer
18 Active employer reporting zero employment and wages
19 - Employment returns or returning back to normal after 07 or 09-18
37-Other reasons for employment change
AE 173 23 03-
PW
✓ 2-B
0-L▾ 90 S▾
AE 73 11-- № 2-BW 0- 905
DW
77
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
6. Logical Errors
In some cases, the data received are not plausible. These logical errors are highlighted in red in
TopCATIWeb. This can occur for reasons such as the Production Employees and
Nonsupervisory Employees (PE) counts end up higher than the All Employees count, as in the
example below. The Interviewer shall resolve this error with the respondent.
Note: PE is displayed as PW in these screenshots. PE and PW are synonymous, with PE having
replaced PW as the current terminology.
MM/A/EMP WW PR CM Hour OT
AE 173
23
09/2023
PW 200
AE
73
11
How can you have
200 non-supervisors
if you only have 173
total employees?
CC1 CC2 PLP CLP RC
☐ 03-- 2-8 0-1
☐ ☑ 2-B
08/2023 PW ▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬
78
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
7. Entering Notes
Interviewers provide notes in TopCATIWeb to document the events in a case. There are two
types of notes: Case Notes and Permanent Notes. The Case Notes are used to document all
events relating to the life cycle of the case that is pertinent to BLS. This includes space for the
Interviewer to keep information related to communicating with the respondent and collecting the
data. The Permanent Notes is a place where critical information can be found quickly.
Notes
Case
060428255
UI Verified Date
03/23/2022
LP Code PP1 Weekly
Beg/End of PP1
Special
1p1 mon sun 6/06-6/12 7/11-7/17
Arrangements
Special Case Notes
Contact
Andrew Dentist
EIN Proxy
PP2
PP2
Permanent Notes
Case Note(s)
Date Created
Call Log
F
Nov 29, 2022, 08:55:40 AM
Jul 13, 2022, 11:01:11 AM
Jun 3, 2022. 01:54:57 PM
Jun 3, 2022, 11:48:33 AM
Jun 3, 2022. 10:44:26 AM
May 3, 2022. 09:29:50 AM
Mav 2. 2022. 02:28:40 PM
Interviewer ↑↓
MCCHAN D
FLECK K
CHAVEZ V
BAYNHAM R
BAYNHAM R
SALINAS JOVAN
SALINAS IOVAN
Notes Options: Select an option
Case Notes
Content of currently selected case note...
collected data for jun.
Case Notes ↑↓
col data for may call bac june on 6/21 @ 12:30
collected data
tt andrew coll april: coll may 19 @1:00 pay period ends 15th
tt andrew coll april: resch for may 19th
Delete Note
Case Notes
х
Add Note(s)
Close
Save Note(s)
Save and Close
72
79
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
8. Scheduling a Collection Call
Once data are collected, the Interviewer shall schedule an appointment date/time to call the
respondent back for the next month. This serves the purpose of allowing the respondent to tell
the Interviewer when he or she will have the data available the following month as well as when
he or she will be available.
To schedule the next appointment, the Interviewer will click the "Scheduler” button in the case.
The pop-up window that appears will allow the interviewer to click on a day and then a timeslot
to schedule the call.
The Scheduler
Button
Status Scheduled
Time zone US/Eastern
Units
Contact Name
Company Name Missing Tooth Dental Office
Andrew Dentist
Home v Data
Utilities
Admin v Tools-> DCC Transfers
Help ▾
Notes Dia
Scheduler
Address/Enrollment
Collection
> Case Details: 080349451
Collection Details
Collection: Select 1 of 1 Unit(s)
Today
Transcripts
Wednesday, October 04, 2
Shortcut Key
Select a
day
October 2023
Tu
We
Th
5
6
9
Fr
Sa
7
10
10
11
11
12
13
14
1-10
17
18
19
20
21
12
24
24
15
25
26
27
28
Closing
30 31
1
2
3
4
How many employees worked or rece
12:30 PM
12:40 PM
12:50 PM
Selected Unit: 4 080349451 PF
1:00 PM
1:10 PM
1:20 PM
Double-click
15
16
6
16
1:30 PM
AE/
MM/YYYY
EMP
ww
on a timeslot
PW
1:40 PM
22
AE
1:50 PM
22
23
09/2023
2:00 PM
PW
2:10 PM
29
20
AE
63
45
2:20 PM
08/2023
PW
2:30 PM
2:40 PM
AE
66
48
2-50 PM
07/2023
PW
AE
68
48
06/2023
PW
show full day
O call(s)/0 unit(s) on Wednesday, October 04, 2023
1-10
11-20
41-50
-50
21-30
Holiday
31-40
1st Closing
Pay Period
Close
80
60
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Once the interviewer double-clicks on a timeslot on the left side of the screen, another pop-up
will show the details of the case and appointment. Click on the “Save” button to schedule the
appointment.
Case ID
080349451
Number Of Units
1
Company Name
Resp. Time
Start
End
Missing Tooth Dental Office
10/04/2023 02:00 PM
10/04/2023 02:00 PM
10/04/2023 02:10 PM
Time Zone
Contact
US/Eastern
Andrew Dentist
Existing Call
Firm Commitment
Thu Oct 12 2023 12:50:00
☐
Save Cancel
It will now update the Date/Time on the case list as well.
Scheduled
Unscheduled
Case List Options: Calls Through Today
Status RC... Mod... Test... Panel...
Next Call Scheduled for Oct 4, 2023, 2:00 PM
Single Select
Alert ↑↓
Appointment Į
Fir...
Case ID ↑↓
Company Name ↑↓
Time Zone... Resp. Time...
A ☑AA All All V
All
2
00 C
Flex2 22Q3
Oct 04, 2023 2:00 PM
080349451
| Missing Tooth Dental Office US/Eastern
02:00 PM
81
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Technical Exhibit 9 - CES Web Collection Tool
1. Respondents are sent a link to the CES Web Collection Tool with each monthly
reminder. The link contains an embedded report number, so when the respondent follows
the link to the report number is pre-populated. Alternatively, if the respondent follows a
bookmark to the page, he or she will need to enter his or her nine-digit report number. A
CAPTCHA will also need to be entered, as shown below. No password is required to
enter the site.
BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS
Current Employment Statistics
Español
ADA Statement | Privacy Policy
Test Your Browser
Current Employment Statistics
Welcome to the Current Employment Statistics Internet data collection site.
Please enter your CES Report Number:
#########
To help us determine that you are a human visitor, please type in the characters seen in the image below. This will allow you to enter the CES data collection
site. This will only take a moment.
90291
OQ
Terms and Conditions of Use
WARNING! You are using an Official United States Government System, which may be used only for authorized purposes. Unauthorized modification of any information stored on this system may result in criminal prosecution. The
Government may monitor and audit the usage of this system, and all persons are hereby notified that the use of this system constitutes consent to such monitoring and auditing. Unauthorized attempts to upload information and/or
change information on these web sites are strictly prohibited and are subject to prosecution under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 and Title 18 U.S.C. Sec. 1001 and 1030.
I Accept
Maintenance activities may be conducted on Sundays from noon to 6:00 p.m. Eastern Time in order to keep the Internet Data Collection Facility (IDCF) at its peak performance and to cause as little
disruption in service as possible to our customers. If the system is unavailable, please try back at a later time.
Please read:
Due to security reasons, your session will time out after 30 minutes of system inactivity. You will need to logon to the website again to continue.
2. At the data collection screen, respondents can enter data for their report numbers for a
specific month. No previously submitted data are displayed on this collection tool since a
password is not required for access.
82
BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS
Current Employment Statistics
CES Report Number: 660000001
Report the columns below for the two week payroll that
includes the 12th of
All Workers
Pay Group 1
Your firm is set up for one pay group.
Pay:
Bi-weekly
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Commissions:
No Commissions
Help Logout
1
2
5
Employee Count
Women Workers
Payroll, Excluding
Commissions
(Whole dollars)
Commissions Paid at Least Once a
Month
(Whole dollars)
Hours, Including Overtime
(Whole hours)
Production Workers
Use for Columns 1-5 (payroll, hours and employment)
Reason for Large
Changes
none
་
none
To add a second pay group, click here
Continue →
If you have questions or comments please send e-mail to: ceswebhelp@bls.gov | Version: 5.2.4
3. The respondent can submit his or her data by clicking the "Continue" button, bringing
him or her to a new screen that contains his or her data. At this screen, the respondent can
review his or her data and either click the link labeled, “To edit data, click here" or the
"Submit Data to BLS" button.
a. When the respondent clicks the continue button, a series of edit and screening
checks will be run against the data he or she has entered. These test the validity of
the data, and if the data potentially has problems, the respondent will be shown an
error message rather than continuing to the review screen.
b. These error messages fall into one of two categories: edit and screening tests.
Edit (or logic tests) check for impossible data. These tests will trigger an error
message when a reporter enters data that are not feasible, like a Women Worker
count that is higher than the All Employees count. When data fail a logical test,
rather than continuing to the next screen, the respondent will receive an error
message that details the issue. In the example where WE > AE, the message will
read:
Employee Count for All Workers is less than Employee Count for
Women Workers
Your data were not submitted because the Employee Count for All
Workers is less than the figure entered for Women Workers.
Please:
-- Verify the Employee Count for All Workers in column 1
-- Verify the Employee Count for Women Workers in column 2
Screening tests check for feasible but unlikely data. These tests will trigger an
error code when a reporter enters data that are possible but unlikely for a variety
of reasons. For example, a report may fail a screening test if the average weekly
hours derived from the entered data is significantly different than the industry
average. When a report fails a screening test, the respondent will receive an
error message rather than continuing to the next screen. Here, the respondent
83


1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
will have the option of editing his or her data or entering a comment code.
Comment codes are located in the drop down boxes in the Reasons for Large
Changes row. These codes allow the respondent to explain why his or her data
are correct even though the data item failed the screening tests and continue to
the next screen. An example of a screening error message is:
Average Weekly Worker Hours is low
Your data were not submitted because the number of hours worked per
All Employees (column 5 divided by column 1) is low for your
industry.
Please:
-- Verify the All Employees Employee Count in column 1
-- Verify the All Employees Hours in column 5
-- If both are correct, choose the most appropriate reason for large
change in column 1-5 that explains the low value.
(END OF SECTION C)
84
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
SECTION D – PACKAGING AND MARKING
D.1 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
All correspondence including, but not limited to e-mails, letters, memos, reports, etc., shall at a
minimum include the following markings:
1. Date
2. Contract Number
3. Project Description or subject such as "Current Employment Statistics” or “CES”
SECTION E - INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE
The Government, through any authorized representatives, has the right, at all reasonable times, to
inspect, or otherwise evaluate the work performed or being performed hereunder and the
premises in which it is being performed. All inspections and evaluations shall be performed in
such manner as will not unduly delay the work.
Pursuant to the appropriate inspection clause as provided below, the final inspection and
acceptance of each specific tasks under this contract shall be made by the Contracting Officer
and/or Contracting Officer's Representative.
SECTION F – DELIVERIES OR PERFORMANCE
F.1 PERIOD OF PERFORMANCE
See PWS Section 1.6 Period of Performance
F.2 PLACE OF PERFORMANCE
See PWS Section 1.7.7 Place of Performance
F.3 DELIVERABLES
The Contractor shall submit deliverables in accordance with the PWS, Technical Exhibit 2.
Deliverables shall contain accurate and complete data.
F.4 NOTICE OF DELAYS
The contractor shall provide written notification to the Contracting Officer of any actual or
potential situation that threatens to delay the timely performance of work under this contract. The
notification shall include all relevant information and shall be made immediately upon the
Contractor having knowledge of the actual or potential situation that may delay this contract.
85
55
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
SECTION G - CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION DATA - N/A
SECTION H - SPECIAL CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS – N/A
SECTION I-CONTRACT CLAUSES, TERMS AND CONDITIONS
I.1 52.252-2 CLAUSES INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE. (FEB 1998)
This contract incorporates one or more clauses by reference, with the same force and effect as if
they were given in full text. Upon request, the Contracting Officer will make their full text
available. Also, the full text of a clause may be accessed electronically at this/these address(es):
https://www.acquisition.gov/
CLAUSES TITLE
52.202-1
DEFINITIONS
52.203-3
GRATUITIES
52.204-2
SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
52.204-7
SYSTEM FOR AWARD MANAGEMENT
52.204-9
PERSONAL IDENTITY VERIFICATION OF CONTRACTOR
PERSONNEL
DATE
NOV 2013
APR 1984
AUG 1996
OCT 2018
JAN 2011
BASIC SAFEGUARDING OF COVERED CONTRACTOR
52.204-21
52.212-4
JUN 2016
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
CONTRACT TERMS AND CONDITIONS-COMMERCIAL ITEMS
ALTERNATE 1
OCT 2018
52.204-23
PROHIBITION ON CONTRACTING FOR HARDWARE,
JUL 2018
52.215-8
52.224-1
52.224-2
SOFTWARE, AND SERVICES DEVELOPED OR PROVIDED
BY KASERSKY LAB AND OTHER COVERED ENTITIES
ORDER OF PRECEDENCE - UNIFORM CONTRACT FORMAT
PRIVACY ACT NOTIFICATION
OCT 1997
APR 1984
PRIVACY ACT
APR 1984
52.227-1
AUTHORIZATION AND CONSENT
DEC 2007
52.227-2
NOTICE AND ASSISTANCE REGARDING PATENT AND
COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT
DEC 2007
52.227-14
RIGHTS IN DATA – GENERAL
-
MAY 2014
52.227-16
ADDITIONAL RIGHTS IN DATA REQUIREMENTS
JUN 1987
52.232-1
PAYMENTS
52.232-22
LIMITATION OF FUNDS
52.232-40 PROVIDING ACCELERATED PAYMENTS TO SMALL BUSINESS
SUBCONTRACTORS
52.233-3
PROTEST AFTER AWARD
52.237-3
CONTINUITY OF SERVICES
52.232-18
AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS
52.232-39
UNENFORCEABILITY OF UNAUTHORIZED OBLIGATIONS
APR 1984
APR 1984
DEC 2013
AUG 1996
JAN 1991
APR 1984
JUN 2013
86
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
I.2 52.203-18 PROHIBITION ON CONTRACTING WITH ENTITIES THAT REQUIRE
CERTAIN INTERNAL CONFIDENTIALITY AGREEMENTS OR STATEMENTS-
REPRESENTATION. (JAN 2017)
Definition. As used in this provision-
Internal confidentiality agreement or statement, subcontract, and subcontractor, are defined in the
clause at 52.203-19, Prohibition on Requiring Certain Internal Confidentiality Agreements or
Statements.
In accordance with section 743 of Division E, Title VII, of the Consolidated and Further
Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015 (Pub. L. 113-235) and its successor provisions in
subsequent appropriations acts (and as extended in continuing resolutions), Government agencies
are not permitted to use funds appropriated (or otherwise made available) for contracts with an
entity that requires employees or subcontractors of such entity seeking to report waste, fraud, or
abuse to sign internal confidentiality agreements or statements prohibiting or otherwise
restricting such employees or subcontractors from lawfully reporting such waste, fraud, or abuse
to a designated investigative or law enforcement representative of a Federal department or
agency authorized to receive such information.
The prohibition in paragraph (b) of this provision does not contravene requirements applicable to
Standard Form 312, (Classified Information Nondisclosure Agreement), Form 4414 (Sensitive
Compartmented Information Nondisclosure Agreement), or any other form issued by a Federal
department or agency governing the nondisclosure of classified information.
Representation. By submission of its offer, the Offeror represents that it will not require its
employees or subcontractors to sign or comply with internal confidentiality agreements or
statements prohibiting or otherwise restricting such employees or subcontractors from lawfully
reporting waste, fraud, or abuse related to the performance of a Government contract to a
designated investigative or law enforcement representative of a Federal department or agency
authorized to receive such information (e.g., agency Office of the Inspector General).
(End of provision)
I.3 52.212-5 CONTRACT TERMS AND CONDITIONS REQUIRED TO IMPLEMENT STATUTES OR
EXECUTIVE ORDERS-COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES (JAN 2025)
(a) The Contractor shall comply with the following Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR)
clauses, which are incorporated in this contract by reference, to implement provisions of law or
Executive orders applicable to acquisitions of commercial products and commercial services:
(1) 52.203-19, Prohibition on Requiring Certain Internal Confidentiality Agreements or
Statements (JAN 2017) (section 743 of Division E, Title VII, of the Consolidated and Further
Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015 (Pub. L. 113-235) and its successor provisions in
subsequent appropriations acts (and as extended in continuing resolutions)).
88
87
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(2) 52.204-23, Prohibition on Contracting for Hardware, Software, and Services
Developed or Provided by Kaspersky Lab Covered Entities (DEC 2023) (Section 1634 of Pub. L.
115-91).
(3) 52.204-25, Prohibition on Contracting for Certain Telecommunications and Video
Surveillance Services or Equipment. (Nov 2021) (Section 889(a)(1)(A) of Pub. L. 115-232).
2015).
(4) 52.209-10, Prohibition on Contracting with Inverted Domestic Corporations (Nov
(5) 52.232-40, Providing Accelerated Payments to Small Business Subcontractors (MAR
2023) (31 U.S.C. 3903 and 10 U.S.C. 3801).
(6) 52.233-3, Protest After Award (AUG 1996) (31 U.S.C. 3553).
(7) 52.233-4, Applicable Law for Breach of Contract Claim (OCT 2004) (Public Laws
108-77 and 108-78 ( 19 U.S.C. 3805 note)).
(b) The Contractor shall comply with the FAR clauses in this paragraph (b) that
the Contracting Officer has indicated as being incorporated in this contract by reference to
implement provisions of law or Executive orders applicable to acquisitions of commercial
products and commercial services:
[Contracting Officer check as appropriate.]
_x_ (1) 52.203-6, Restrictions on Subcontractor Sales to the Government (JUN
2020), with Alternate I (Nov 2021) (41 U.S.C. 4704 and 10 U.S.C. 4655).
_x_ (2) 52.203-13, Contractor Code of Business Ethics and Conduct (NOV
2021) (41 U.S.C. 3509)).
(3) 52.203-15, Whistleblower Protections under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (JUN 2010) (Section 1553 of Pub. L. 111-5). (Applies to contracts
funded by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.)
(4) 52.203-17, Contractor Employee Whistleblower Rights (Nov 2023) (41 U.S.C.
4712); this clause does not apply to contracts of DoD, NASA, the Coast Guard, or applicable
elements of the intelligence community—see FAR 3.900(a).
_x_ (5) 52.204-10, Reporting Executive Compensation and First-Tier Subcontract
Awards (JUN 2020) (Pub. L. 109-282) (31 U.S.C. 6101 note).
(6) [Reserved].
_x_ (7) 52.204-14, Service Contract Reporting Requirements (OCT 2016) (Pub. L. 111-
117, section 743 of Div. C).
888
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(8) 52.204-15, Service Contract Reporting Requirements for Indefinite-Delivery
Contracts (OCT 2016) (Pub. L. 111-117, section 743 of Div. C).
(9) 52.204-27, Prohibition on a ByteDance Covered Application (JUN 2023) (Section
102 of Division R of Pub. L. 117-328).
(10) 52.204-28, Federal Acquisition Supply Chain Security Act Orders-Federal
Supply Schedules, Governmentwide Acquisition Contracts, and Multi-Agency Contracts. (DEC
2023) (Pub. L. 115–390, title II).
(11)
(i) 52.204-30, Federal Acquisition Supply Chain Security Act Orders―
Prohibition. (DEC 2023) ( Pub. L. 115–390, title II).
(ii) Alternate I (DEC 2023) of 52.204-30.
_x_ (12) 52.209-6, Protecting the Government's Interest When Subcontracting With
Contractors Debarred, Suspended, Proposed for Debarment, or Voluntarily Excluded. (JAN 2025)
(31 U.S.C. 6101 note).
_x_ (13) 52.209-9, Updates of Publicly Available Information Regarding Responsibility
Matters (OCT 2018) (41 U.S.C. 2313).
(14) [Reserved].
(15) 52.219-3, Notice of HUBZone Set-Aside or Sole-Source Award (OCT 2022)
( 15 U.S.C. 657a).
(16) 52.219-4, Notice of Price Evaluation Preference for HUBZone Small Business
Concerns (OCT 2022) (if the offeror elects to waive the preference, it shall so indicate in its offer)
(15 U.S.C. 657a).
(17) [Reserved]
(18)
(i) 52.219-6, Notice of Total Small Business Set-Aside (Nov 2020) (15 U.S.C. 644).
(19)
(ii) Alternate I (MAR 2020) of 52.219-6.
(i) 52.219-7, Notice of Partial Small Business Set-Aside (Nov 2020) (15 U.S.C. 644).
(ii) Alternate I (MAR 2020) of 52.219-7.
88
89
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(20) 52.219-8, Utilization of Small Business Concerns (JAN
2025)( 15 U.S.C. 637(d)(2) and (3)).
(21)
(i) 52.219-9, Small Business Subcontracting Plan (JAN 2025) ( 15 U.S.C. 637(d)(4)).
✗ (ii) Alternate I (Nov 2016) of 52.219-9.
-
(iii) Alternate II (Nov 2016) of 52.219-9.
(iv) Alternate III (JUN 2020) of 52.219-9.
((v) Alternate IV (JAN 2025) of 52.219-9.
(22)
(i) 52.219-13, Notice of Set-Aside of Orders (MAR 2020) (15 U.S.C. 644(r)).
(ii) Alternate I (MAR 2020) of 52.219-13.
(23) 52.219-14, Limitations on Subcontracting (OCT 2022) (15 U.S.C. 657s).
(24) 52.219-16, Liquidated Damages-Subcontracting Plan (SEP
2021) (15 U.S.C. 637(d)(4)(F)(i)).
(25) 52.219-27, Notice of Set-Aside for, or Sole-Source Award to, Service-Disabled
Veteran-Owned Small Business (SDVOSB) Concerns Eligible Under the SDVOSB Program
(FEB 2024) (15 U.S.C. 657f).
(26)
(i) 52.219-28, Postaward Small Business Program Rerepresentation (JAN
2025) (15 U.S.C. 632(a)(2)).
_ (ii) Alternate I (MAR 2020) of 52.219-28.
(27) 52.219-29, Notice of Set-Aside for, or Sole-Source Award to, Economically
Disadvantaged Women-Owned Small Business Concerns (OCT 2022) (15 U.S.C. 637(m)).
(28) 52.219-30, Notice of Set-Aside for, or Sole-Source Award to, Women-Owned
Small Business Concerns Eligible Under the Women-Owned Small Business Program (OCT
2022) (15 U.S.C. 637(m)).
(29) 52.219-32, Orders Issued Directly Under Small Business Reserves (MAR
2020) (15 U.S.C. 644(r)).
90
90
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(30) 52.219-33, Nonmanufacturer Rule (SEP 2021) ( 15 U.S.C. 637(a)(17)).
_x_ (31) 52.222-3, Convict Labor (JUN 2003) (E.O.11755).
_x_ (32) 52.222-19, Child Labor-Cooperation with Authorities and Remedies (JAN
2025)(E.O. 13126).
_x_ (33) 52.222-21, Prohibition of Segregated Facilities (APR 2015).
x (34)
(i) 52.222-26, Equal Opportunity (SEP 2016) (E.O.11246).
(ii) Alternate I (FEB 1999) of 52.222-26.
X (35)
(i) 52.222-35, Equal Opportunity for Veterans (JUN 2020) ( 38 U.S.C. 4212).
(ii) Alternate I (JUL 2014) of 52.222-35.
x (36)
(i) 52.222-36, Equal Opportunity for Workers with Disabilities (JUN
2020) (29 U.S.C. 793).
_ (ii) Alternate I (JUL 2014) of 52.222-36.
_x_ (37) 52.222-37, Employment Reports on Veterans (JUN 2020) (38 U.S.C. 4212).
_x_ (38) 52.222-40, Notification of Employee Rights Under the National Labor Relations
Act (DEC 2010) (E.O. 13496).
x (39)
(i) 52.222-50, Combating Trafficking in Persons (Nov 2021) (22 U.S.C. chapter 78
and E.O. 13627).
(ii) Alternate I (MAR 2015) of 52.222-50 (22 U.S.C. chapter 78 and E.O. 13627).
(40) 52.222-54, Employment Eligibility Verification (JAN 2025) ( Executive Order
12989). (Not applicable to the acquisition of commercially available off-the-shelf items or
certain other types of commercial products or commercial services as prescribed in
FAR 22.1803.)
(41)
91
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(i) 52.223-9, Estimate of Percentage of Recovered Material Content for EPA-
Designated Items (May 2008) ( 42 U.S.C. 6962(c)(3)(A)(ii)). (Not applicable to
the acquisition of commercially available off-the-shelf items.)
(ii) Alternate I (MAY 2008) of 52.223-9 (42 U.S.C. 6962(i)(2)(C)). (Not applicable
to the acquisition of commercially available off-the-shelf items.)
(42) 52.223-11, Ozone-Depleting Substances and High Global Warming Potential
Hydrofluorocarbons (MAY 2024) ( 42 U.S.C. 7671, et seq.).
(43) 52.223-12, Maintenance, Service, Repair, or Disposal of Refrigeration Equipment
and Air Conditioners (MAY 2024) (42 U.S.C. 7671, et seq.).
(44) 52.223-20, Aerosols (MAY 2024) (42 U.S.C. 7671, et seq.).
(45) 52.223-21, Foams (MAY 2024) (42 U.S.C. 7671, et seq.).
(46) 52.223-23, Sustainable Products and Services (MAY 2024) (E.O. 14057, 7
U.S.C. 8102, 42 U.S.C. 6962, 42 U.S.C. 8259b, and 42 U.S.C. 76711).
(47)
(i) 52.224-3 Privacy Training (JAN 2017) ( 5 U.S.C. 552 a).
(48)
(ii) Alternate I (JAN 2017) of 52.224-3.
(i) 52.225-1, Buy American-Supplies (OCT 2022) (41 U.S.C. chapter 83).
(49)
(ii) Alternate I (OCT 2022) of 52.225-1.
(i) 52.225-3, Buy American-Free Trade Agreements-Israeli Trade Act (NOV
2023) (19 U.S.C. 3301 note, 19 U.S.C. 2112 note, 19 U.S.C. 3805 note, 19 U.S.C. 4001 note, 19
U.S.C. chapter 29 (sections 4501-4732), Public Law 103-182, 108-77, 108-78, 108-286, 108-
302, 109-53, 109-169, 109-283, 110-138, 112-41, 112-42, and 112-43.
(ii) Alternate I [Reserved].
(iii) Alternate II (JAN 2025) of 52.225-3.
(iv) Alternate III (FEB 2024) of 52.225-3.
(v) Alternate IV (Oct 2022) of 52.225-3.
92
22
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(50) 52.225-5, Trade Agreements (NOV 2023) ( 19 U.S.C. 2501, et
seq., 19 U.S.C. 3301 note).
(51) 52.225-13, Restrictions on Certain Foreign Purchases (FEB 2021) (E.O.'s,
proclamations, and statutes administered by the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the
Department of the Treasury).
(52) 52.225-26, Contractors Performing Private Security Functions Outside the United
States (Oct 2016) (Section 862, as amended, of the National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2008; 10 U.S.C. Subtitle A, Part V, Subpart G Note).
(53) 52.226-4, Notice of Disaster or Emergency Area Set-Aside (Nov 2007)
(42 U.S.C. 5150).
(54) 52.226-5, Restrictions on Subcontracting Outside Disaster
or Emergency Area (Nov 2007) (42 U.S.C. 5150).
_x_ (55) 52.226-8, Encouraging Contractor Policies to Ban Text Messaging While
Driving (MAY 2024) (E.O. 13513).
(56) 52.229-12, Tax on Certain Foreign Procurements (FEB 2021).
(57) 52.232-29, Terms for Financing of Purchases of Commercial
Products and Commercial Services (Nov 2021) (41 U.S.C. 4505, 10 U.S.C. 3805).
(58) 52.232-30, Installment Payments for Commercial Products and Commercial
Services (Nov 2021) (41 U.S.C. 4505, 10 U.S.C. 3805).
(59) 52.232-33, Payment by Electronic Funds Transfer-System for Award
Management (OCT2018) (31 U.S.C. 3332).
_x_ (60) 52.232-34, Payment by Electronic Funds Transfer-Other than System for Award
Management (Jul 2013) (31 U.S.C. 3332).
(61) 52.232-36, Payment by Third Party (MAY 2014) (31 U.S.C. 3332).
(62) 52.239-1, Privacy or Security Safeguards (AUG 1996) ( 5 U.S.C. 552a).
(63) 52.240-1, Prohibition on Unmanned Aircraft Systems Manufactured or
Assembled by American Security Drone Act-Covered Foreign Entities (Nov 2024) (Sections
1821-1826, Pub. L. 118-31, 41 U.S.C. 3901 note prec.).
(64) 52.242-5, Payments to Small Business Subcontractors (JAN
2017) (15 U.S.C. 637(d)(13)).
(65)
93


1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(i) 52.247-64, Preference for Privately Owned U.S.-Flag Commercial Vessels (Nov
2021) (46 U.S.C. 55305 and 10 U.S.C. 2631).
_ (ii) Alternate I (APR 2003) of 52.247-64.
(iii) Alternate II (Nov 2021) of 52.247-64.
(c) The Contractor shall comply with the FAR clauses in this paragraph (c), applicable
to commercial services, that the Contracting Officer has indicated as being incorporated in this
contract by reference to implement provisions of law or Executive orders applicable
to acquisitions of commercial products and commercial services:
[Contracting Officer check as appropriate.]
_x_ (1) 52.222-41, Service Contract Labor Standards (AUG 2018) (41 U.S.C. chapter67).
_x_ (2) 52.222-42, Statement of Equivalent Rates for Federal
Hires (MAY 2014) (29 U.S.C. 206 and 41 U.S.C. chapter 67).
x (3) 52.222-43, Fair Labor Standards Act and Service Contract Labor Standards-Price
Adjustment (Multiple Year and Option Contracts) (AUG 2018) (29 U.S.C. 206 and
41 U.S.C. chapter 67).
x (4) 52.222-44, Fair Labor Standards Act and Service Contract Labor Standards-Price
Adjustment (May 2014) (29U.S.C.206 and 41 U.S.C. chapter 67).
(5) 52.222-51, Exemption from Application of the Service Contract Labor Standards
to Contracts for Maintenance, Calibration, or Repair of Certain Equipment-Requirements
(May 2014) (41 U.S.C. chapter 67).
(6) 52.222-53, Exemption from Application of the Service Contract Labor Standards
to Contracts for Certain Services-Requirements (MAY 2014) (41 U.S.C. chapter 67).
_x_ (7) 52.222-55, Minimum Wages for Contractor Workers Under Executive Order
14026 (JAN 2022).
_x_ (8) 52.222-62, Paid Sick Leave Under Executive Order 13706 (JAN 2022) (E.O.
13706).
(9) 52.226-6, Promoting Excess Food Donation to Nonprofit Organizations (Jun 2020)
(42 U.S.C. 1792).
(10) 52.247-69, Reporting Requirement for U.S.-Flag Air Carriers Regarding Training
to Prevent Human Trafficking (JAN 2025) ( 49 U.S.C. 40118(g)).
94
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(d) Comptroller General Examination of Record. The Contractor shall comply with the
provisions of this paragraph (d) if this contract was awarded using other than sealed bid, is in
excess of the simplified acquisition threshold, as defined in FAR 2.101, on the date of award of
this contract, and does not contain the clause at 52.215-2, Audit and Records-Negotiation.
(1) The Comptroller General of the United States, or an authorized representative of the
Comptroller General, shall have access to and right to examine any of the Contractor's directly
pertinent records involving transactions related to this contract.
(2) The Contractor shall make available at its offices at all reasonable times the records,
materials, and other evidence for examination, audit, or reproduction, until 3 years after final
payment under this contract or for any shorter period specified in FAR subpart 4.7, Contractor
Records Retention, of the other clauses of this contract. If this contract is completely or partially
terminated, the records relating to the work terminated shall be made available for 3 years after
any resulting final termination settlement. Records relating to appeals under the disputes clause
or to litigation or the settlement of claims arising under or relating to this contract shall be made
available until such appeals, litigation, or claims are finally resolved.
(3) As used in this clause, records include books, documents, accounting procedures and
practices, and other data, regardless of type and regardless of form. This does not require the
Contractor to create or maintain any record that the Contractor does not maintain in the ordinary
course of business or pursuant to a provision of law.
(e)
(1) Notwithstanding the requirements of the clauses in paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of
this clause, the Contractor is not required to flow down any FAR clause, other than those in this
paragraph (e)(1), in a subcontract for commercial products or commercial services. Unless
otherwise indicated below, the extent of the flow down shall be as required by the clause-
(i) 52.203-13, Contractor Code of Business Ethics and Conduct (NOV
2021) (41 U.S.C. 3509).
4712).
(ii) 52.203-17, Contractor Employee Whistleblower Rights (Nov 2023) ( 41 U.S.C.
(iii) 52.203-19, Prohibition on Requiring Certain Internal Confidentiality Agreements
or Statements (Jan 2017) (section 743 of Division E, Title VII, of the Consolidated and Further
Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015 (Pub. L. 113-235) and its successor provisions in
subsequent appropriations acts (and as extended in continuing resolutions)).
(iv) 52.204-23, Prohibition on Contracting for Hardware, Software, and Services
Developed or Provided by Kaspersky Lab Covered Entities (DEC 2023) (Section 1634 of Pub. L.
115-91).
95
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(v) 52.204-25, Prohibition on Contracting for Certain Telecommunications and Video
Surveillance Services or Equipment. (Nov 2021) (Section 889(a)(1)(A) of Pub. L. 115-232).
(vi) 52.204-27, Prohibition on a ByteDance Covered Application (JUN 2023) (Section
102 of Division R of Pub. L. 117-328).
(vii)
(A) 52.204-30, Federal Acquisition Supply Chain Security Act Orders―
Prohibition. (DEC 2023) (Pub. L. 115–390, title II).
(B) Alternate I (DEC 2023) of 52.204–30.
(viii) 52.219-8, Utilization of Small Business Concerns (JAN
2025) (15 U.S.C. 637(d)(2) and (3)), in all subcontracts that offer further subcontracting
opportunities. If the subcontract (except subcontracts to small business concerns) exceeds the
applicable threshold specified in FAR 19.702(a) on the date of subcontract award, the
subcontractor must include 52.219-8 in lower tier subcontracts that offer subcontracting
opportunities.
(ix) 52.222-21, Prohibition of Segregated Facilities (APR 2015).
(x) 52.222-26, Equal Opportunity (SEP 2016) (E.O.11246).
(xi) 52.222-35, Equal Opportunity for Veterans (JUN 2020) (38 U.S.C. 4212).
(xii) 52.222-36, Equal Opportunity for Workers with Disabilities (JUN
2020) (29 U.S.C. 793).
(xiii) 52.222-37, Employment Reports on Veterans (JUN 2020) (38 U.S.C. 4212).
(xiv) 52.222-40, Notification of Employee Rights Under the National Labor Relations
Act (DEC 2010) (E.O. 13496). Flow down required in accordance with paragraph (f) of FAR
clause 52.222-40.
(xv) 52.222-41, Service Contract Labor Standards (AUG
2018) (41 U.S.C. chapter 67).
(xvi)
(A) 52.222-50, Combating Trafficking in Persons (Nov
2021) (22 U.S.C. chapter 78 and E.O 13627).
(B) Alternate I (MAR 2015) of 52.222-50 (22 U.S.C. chapter 78 and E.O. 13627).
96
96
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
(xvii) 52.222-51, Exemption from Application of the Service Contract Labor
Standards to Contracts for Maintenance, Calibration, or Repair of Certain Equipment-
Requirements (May 2014) (41 U.S.C. chapter 67).
(xviii) 52.222-53, Exemption from Application of the Service Contract Labor
Standards to Contracts for Certain Services-Requirements (MAY 2014) (41 U.S.C. chapter 67).
(xix) 52.222-54, Employment Eligibility Verification (JAN 2025) ( E.O. 12989).
(xx) 52.222-55, Minimum Wages for Contractor Workers Under Executive Order
14026 (JAN 2022).
13706).
(xxi) 52.222-62, Paid Sick Leave Under Executive Order 13706 (JAN 2022) (E.O.
(xxii)
(A) 52.224-3, Privacy Training (Jan 2017) ( 5 U.S.C. 552a).
(B) Alternate I (JAN 2017) of 52.224-3.
(xxiii) 52.225-26, Contractors Performing Private Security Functions Outside
the United States (OCT 2016) (Section 862, as amended, of the National Defense Authorization
Act for Fiscal Year 2008; 10 U.S.C. Subtitle A, Part V, Subpart G Note).
(xxiv) 52.226-6, Promoting Excess Food Donation to Nonprofit Organizations (JUN
2020) (42 U.S.C. 1792). Flow down required in accordance with paragraph (e) of FAR
clause 52.226-6.
(xxv) 52.232-40, Providing Accelerated Payments to Small Business
Subcontractors (Mar 2023) (31 U.S.C. 3903 and 10 U.S.C. 3801). Flow down required in
accordance with paragraph (c) of 52.232-40.
(xxvi) 52.240-1, Prohibition on Unmanned Aircraft Systems Manufactured or
Assembled by American Security Drone Act-Covered Foreign Entities (Nov 2024) (Sections
1821-1826, Pub. L. 118-31, 41 U.S.C. 3901 note prec.).
(xxvii) 52.247-64, Preference for Privately Owned U.S.-Flag Commercial
Vessels (Nov 2021) ( 46 U.S.C. 55305 and 10 U.S.C. 2631). Flow down required in accordance
with paragraph (d) of FAR clause 52.247-64.
(2) While not required, the Contractor may include in its subcontracts for commercial
products and commercial services a minimal number of additional clauses necessary to satisfy its
contractual obligations.
(End of clause)
97
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
I.4 52.217-8 OPTION TO EXTEND SERVICES. (NOV 1999)
The Government may require continued performance of any services within the limits and at the
rates specified in the contract. These rates may be adjusted only as a result of revisions to
prevailing labor rates provided by the Secretary of Labor. The option provision may be exercised
more than once, but the total extension of performance hereunder shall not exceed 6 months. The
Contracting Officer may exercise the option by written notice to the Contractor within at least 15
days prior to order expiration.
(End of clause)
I.5 52.217-9 OPTION TO EXTEND THE TERM OF THE CONTRACT. (MAR 2000)
The Government may extend the term of this contract by written notice to the Contractor within
at least 5 days prior to base/option period expiration; provided that the Government gives the
Contractor a preliminary written notice of its intent to extend at least 15 days before the order
expires. The preliminary notice does not commit the Government to an extension.
If the Government exercises this option, the extended contract shall be considered to include this
option clause.
The total duration of this contract, including the exercise of any options under this clause, shall
not exceed 5 years.
(End of clause)
I.6 52.227-14 RIGHTS IN DATA-GENERAL. (MAY 2014)
Definitions. As used in this clause-
Computer database or database means a collection of recorded information in a form capable of,
and for the purpose of, being stored in, processed, and operated on by a computer. The term does
not include computer software.
Computer software- (1) Means (i) Computer programs that comprise a series of instructions,
rules, routines, or statements, regardless of the media in which recorded, that allow or cause a
computer to perform a specific operation or series of operations; and
(ii) Recorded information comprising source code listings, design details, algorithms, processes,
flow charts, formulas, and related material that would enable the computer program to be
produced, created, or compiled.
(2) Does not include computer databases or computer software documentation.
Computer software documentation means owner's manuals, user's manuals, installation
instructions, operating instructions, and other similar items, regardless of storage medium, that
explain the capabilities of the computer software or provide instructions for using the software.
98
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Data means recorded information, regardless of form or the media on which it may be recorded.
The term includes technical data and computer software. The term does not include information
incidental to contract administration, such as financial, administrative, cost or pricing, or
management information.
Form, fit, and function data means data relating to items, components, or processes that are
sufficient to enable physical and functional interchangeability, and data identifying source, size,
configuration, mating and attachment characteristics, functional characteristics, and performance
requirements. For computer software it means data identifying source, functional characteristics,
and performance requirements but specifically excludes the source code, algorithms, processes,
formulas, and flow charts of the software.
Limited rights means the rights of the Government in limited rights data as set forth in the
Limited Rights Notice of paragraph (g)(3) if included in this clause.
Limited rights data means data, other than computer software, that embody trade secrets or are
commercial or financial and confidential or privileged, to the extent that such data pertain to
items, components, or processes developed at private expense, including minor modifications.
Restricted computer software means computer software developed at private expense and that is
a trade secret, is commercial or financial and confidential or privileged, or is copyrighted
computer software, including minor modifications of the computer software.
Restricted rights, as used in this clause, means the rights of the Government in restricted
computer software, as set forth in a Restricted Rights Notice of paragraph (g) if included in this
clause, or as otherwise may be provided in a collateral agreement incorporated in and made part
of this contract, including minor modifications of such computer software.
Technical data, means recorded information (regardless of the form or method of the recording)
of a scientific or technical nature (including computer databases and computer software
documentation). This term does not include computer software or financial, administrative, cost
or pricing, or management data or other information incidental to contract administration. The
term includes recorded information of a scientific or technical nature that is included in computer
databases. (See 41U.S.C. 116).
Unlimited rights means the rights of the Government to use, disclose, reproduce, prepare
derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and display publicly, in
any manner and for any purpose, and to have or permit others to do so.
Allocation of rights. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this clause, the Government shall
have unlimited rights in-
Data first produced in the performance of this contract;
Form, fit, and function data delivered under this contract;
99
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Data delivered under this contract (except for restricted computer software) that constitute
manuals or instructional and training material for installation, operation, or routine maintenance
and repair of items, components, or processes delivered or furnished for use under this contract;
and
All other data delivered under this contract unless provided otherwise for limited rights data or
restricted computer software in accordance with paragraph (g) of this clause.
The Contractor shall have the right to-
Assert copyright in data first produced in the performance of this contract to the extent provided
in paragraph (c)(1) of this clause;
Use, release to others, reproduce, distribute, or publish any data first produced or specifically
used by the Contractor in the performance of this contract, unless provided otherwise in
paragraph (d) of this clause;
Substantiate the use of, add, or correct limited rights, restricted rights, or copyright notices and to
take other appropriate action, in accordance with paragraphs (e) and (f) of this clause; and
Protect from unauthorized disclosure and use those data that are limited rights data or restricted
computer software to the extent provided in paragraph (g) of this clause.
Copyright- (1) Data first produced in the performance of this contract. (i) Unless provided
otherwise in paragraph (d) of this clause, the Contractor may, without prior approval of the
Contracting Officer, assert copyright in scientific and technical articles based on or containing
data first produced in the performance of this contract and published in academic, technical or
professional journals, symposia proceedings, or similar works. The prior, express written
permission of the Contracting Officer is required to assert copyright in all other data first
produced in the performance of this contract.
When authorized to assert copyright to the data, the Contractor shall affix the applicable
copyright notices of 17 U.S.C. 401 or 402, and an acknowledgment of Government sponsorship
(including contract number).
For data other than computer software, the Contractor grants to the Government, and others
acting on its behalf, a paid-up, nonexclusive, irrevocable, worldwide license in such copyrighted
data to reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly
and display publicly by or on behalf of the Government. For computer software, the Contractor
grants to the Government, and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up, nonexclusive, irrevocable,
worldwide license in such copyrighted computer software to reproduce, prepare derivative
works, and perform publicly and display publicly (but not to distribute copies to the public) by or
on behalf of the Government.
100
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Data not first produced in the performance of this contract. The Contractor shall not, without the
prior written permission of the Contracting Officer, incorporate in data delivered under this
contract any data not first produced in the performance of this contract unless the Contractor-
Identifies the data; and
Grants to the Government, or acquires on its behalf, a license of the same scope as set forth in
paragraph (c)(1) of this clause or, if such data are restricted computer software, the Government
shall acquire a copyright license as set forth in paragraph (g)(4) of this clause (if included in this
contract) or as otherwise provided in a collateral agreement incorporated in or made part of this
contract.
Removal of copyright notices. The Government will not remove any authorized copyright
notices placed on data pursuant to this paragraph (c), and will include such notices on all
reproductions of the data.
Release, publication, and use of data. The Contractor shall have the right to use, release to others,
reproduce, distribute, or publish any data first produced or specifically used by the Contractor in
the performance of this contract, except-
As prohibited by Federal law or regulation (e.g., export control or national security laws or
regulations);
As expressly set forth in this contract; or
If the Contractor receives or is given access to data necessary for the performance of this contract
that contain restrictive markings, the Contractor shall treat the data in accordance with such
markings unless specifically authorized otherwise in writing by the Contracting Officer.
Unauthorized marking of data. (1) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this contract
concerning inspection or acceptance, if any data delivered under this contract are marked with
the notices specified in paragraph (g)(3) or (g) (4) if included in this clause, and use of the
notices is not authorized by this clause, or if the data bears any other restrictive or limiting
markings not authorized by this contract, the Contracting Officer may at any time either return
the data to the Contractor, or cancel or ignore the markings. However, pursuant to 41 U.S.C.
4703, the following procedures shall apply prior to canceling or ignoring the markings.
The Contracting Officer will make written inquiry to the Contractor affording the Contractor 60
days from receipt of the inquiry to provide written justification to substantiate the propriety of
the markings;
If the Contractor fails to respond or fails to provide written justification to substantiate the
propriety of the markings within the 60-day period (or a longer time approved in writing by the
Contracting Officer for good cause shown), the Government shall have the right to cancel or
ignore the markings at any time after said period and the data will no longer be made subject to
any disclosure prohibitions.
101
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
If the Contractor provides written justification to substantiate the propriety of the markings
within the period set in paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this clause, the Contracting Officer will consider
such written justification and determine whether or not the markings are to be cancelled or
ignored. If the Contracting Officer determines that the markings are authorized, the Contractor
will be so notified in writing. If the Contracting Officer determines, with concurrence of the head
of the contracting activity, that the markings are not authorized, the Contracting Officer will
furnish the Contractor a written determination, which determination will become the final agency
decision regarding the appropriateness of the markings unless the Contractor files suit in a court
of competent jurisdiction within 90 days of receipt of the Contracting Officer's decision. The
Government will continue to abide by the markings under this paragraph (e)(1)(iii) until final
resolution of the matter either by the Contracting Officer's determination becoming final (in
which instance the Government will thereafter have the right to cancel or ignore the markings at
any time and the data will no longer be made subject to any disclosure prohibitions), or by final
disposition of the matter by court decision if suit is filed.
The time limits in the procedures set forth in paragraph (e)(1) of this clause may be modified in
accordance with agency regulations implementing the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C.
552) if necessary to respond to a request thereunder.
Except to the extent the Government's action occurs as the result of final disposition of the
matter by a court of competent jurisdiction, the Contractor is not precluded by paragraph (e) of
the clause from bringing a claim, in accordance with the Disputes clause of this contract, that
may arise as the result of the Government removing or ignoring authorized markings on data
delivered under this contract.
Omitted or incorrect markings. (1) Data delivered to the Government without any restrictive
markings shall be deemed to have been furnished with unlimited rights. The Government is not
liable for the disclosure, use, or reproduction of such data.
If the unmarked data has not been disclosed without restriction outside the Government, the
Contractor may request, within 6 months (or a longer time approved by the Contracting Officer
in writing for good cause shown) after delivery of the data, permission to have authorized notices
placed on the data at the Contractor's expense. The Contracting Officer may agree to do so if the
Contractor-
Identifies the data to which the omitted notice is to be applied;
Demonstrates that the omission of the notice was inadvertent;
Establishes that the proposed notice is authorized; and
Acknowledges that the Government has no liability for the disclosure, use, or reproduction of
any data made prior to the addition of the notice or resulting from the omission of the notice.
If data has been marked with an incorrect notice, the Contracting Officer may-
102
1605C5-25-R-00002
Current Employment Statistics (CES)
Permit correction of the notice at the Contractor's expense if the Contractor identifies the data
and demonstrates that the correct notice is authorized; or
Correct any incorrect notices.
Protection of limited rights data and restricted computer software. (1) The Contractor may
withhold from delivery qualifying limited rights data or restricted computer software that are not
data identified in paragraphs (b)(1)(i), (ii), and (iii) of this clause. As a condition to this
withholding, the Contractor shall-
Identify the data being withheld; and
Furnish form, fit, and function data instead.
Limited rights data that are formatted as a computer database for delivery to the Government
shall be treated as limited rights data and not restricted computer software.
(Reserved)
Subcontracting. The Contractor shall obtain from its subcontractors all data and rights therein
necessary to fulfill the Contractor's obligations to the Government under this contract. If a
subcontractor refuses to accept terms affording the Government those rights, the Contractor shall
promptly notify the Contracting Officer of the refusal and shall not proceed with the subcontract
award without authorization in writing from the Contracting Officer.
Relationship to patents or other rights. Nothing contained in this clause shall imply a license to
the Government under any patent or be construed as affecting the scope of any license or other
right otherwise granted to the Government.
(End of clause)
1.7 52.227-16 ADDITIONAL DATA REQUIREMENTS. (JUN 1987)
In addition to the data (as defined in the clause at 52.227-14, Rights in Data - General clause or
other equivalent included in this contract) specified elsewhere in this contract to be delivered, the
Contracting Officer may, at any time during contract performance or within a period of 3 years
after acceptance of all items to be delivered under this contract, order any data first produced or
specifically used in the performance of this contract.
The Rights in Data - General clause or other equivalent included in this contract is applicable to
all data ordered under this Additional Data Requirements clause. Nothing contained in this
clause shall require the Contractor to deliver any data the withholding of which is authorized by
the Rights in Data - General or other equivalent clause of this contract, or data which are
specifically identified in this contract as not subject to this clause.
103
